
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Context
The  share  of  agriculture  finance  as  a
proportion  of  outstanding national  credit
remains below 5 per cent and shows little
signs  of  improvement  (CBK,  2015),
despite  several  commercial  and
microfinance institutions in Kenya having
established  agribusiness  departments.
Some of the key barriers include the high
risk  associated  with  agriculture  due  to
production  and  price  risks;  and  lack  of
collateral and reliable data on smallholder
farmers. The transaction costs incurred in
reaching  remote  rural  populations  are
also  high.  The  decline  in  agricultural
productivity in Kenya has been attributed
to poor access to farm credit and financial
services  (World  Bank,  2015).  This  gap
hampers  national  efforts  to ensure food
security, improve livelihoods and spur the
growth of the rural economy. 

To  address  this  challenge,  improved
access  to  rural  financial  services  has
been  proposed  (AGRA,  2015).  Agri-
innovation wallet, a promising solution to
the  problem,  is  a  novel  value  chain
financing option that links farmers, input
suppliers,  markets  and  the  financial
provider.  It  is  an  e-wallet  platform  that
facilitates  timely  and  efficient
transactions.  It  targets  the  unbanked
smallholder  farmers in  contract  farming.
The off-taker pays the farmer through the
wallet  and  the  farmer  saves  money
restricted for the purchase of agricultural
innovations. Input suppliers are also paid

through the system and if need be, farmers
access  overdrafts  for  the  purchase  of
agricultural inputs. Digital financial services
lower transaction costs making credit more
available. A study was carried out to assess
farmers’  willingness  to  save  and  borrow
funds through the agri-innovation wallet for
the  purchase  of  agricultural  inputs.
Specifically,  the  study  sought  to  test  and
monitor  the  proportion  of  farmers  who
would  purchase  innovations  with  funds  in
their agri-innovation wallet and the effect of
the  innovation  on  agricultural  productivity
and the farmers’ income. 

Approach and Results
The  project  targeted  tomato  farmers  in
Makueni  County  and  potato  farmers  in
Nyeri,  Nyandarua  and  Nakuru  Counties.
The potato farmers were specifically located
in  Naromoru,  Olkalau  and  Keringet,
respectively.  Both  the  tomato  and  potato
farmers were engaged in contract farming.
A baseline  survey  was  carried  out  before
the implementation of the project to prepare
baseline  information  on  several  indicators
against  which  to  the  performance  and
impact  of  the  programme  would  be
assessed. The survey laid the foundationfor
attribution  of  results  to  the  project
interventions. End-line evaluation of the

Plate 1- Farmer using mobile-based service
(Photo: Technoserve.org)

Key Messages

Series F – Foundations : Information and Communication Technology

Digital Innovation for Building 
Liquidity for Agricultural Payments
 Prof. John Mburu, Esther Mujuka, Sijmen de Hoogh, Vyone Mingate and Ad Rietberg

Digitizing payments from off-
takers to smallholder 
farmers is a strong entry 
point for integrating digital
financial services into 
agriculture value chains.

Digitized value chains create 
more efficient markets.

Demand exists for digitized 
payment ecosystem that 
allows savings and credit 
restricted for the 
purchase of agricultural 
innovations.

Agri-innovation wallet links 
smallholder farmers to 
buyers, input suppliers 
and credit, increasing 
farm productivity and 
incomes.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

25



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

agri-innovation  wallet  project  was
undertaken to assess project outcomes and
achievements. 

Agri-innovation  wallet  enhanced  savings
and  credit  access  for  agricultural  inputs.
Results revealed that agri-innovation wallet
enhanced  convenience  for  saving  and
timely  access  to  credit.  This  optimized
decision making for  increased productivity
and  income.  It  was  found  that  the  agri-
innovation  wallet  savings  contributed  to
yield increases of up to 18 per cent and 15
per cent in potato and tomato value chains
respectively.  Incomes  increased  by  up  to
155 per cent and 92 per cent in potato and
tomato value chains, respectively. 

Demand for  saving and borrowing among
smallholder  farmers  is  unmet. The
willingness  to  save  and  to  borrow  from
innovation  wallet  among both tomato and
potato  farmers  maintained  an  upward
trend,  corroborating  the  growing  body  of
literature that affirms that Kenyan farmers
are  credit  constrained.  For  example,  in
most  cases,  potato  farmers  depend  on
credit  to  procure  certified  seed.  Thus,
without  credit,  they  would  not  be  able  to
plant  certified  seed  and  therefore  their
yields would remain low. 

ICT-based innovations are gaining popula-
rity  among  smallholder  farmers. Farmers
are  increasingly  interested  in  using  ICT
solutions  and  innovations  to  meet  their
farming needs. The project experienced no
difficulties  or  complaints  about  the use of
mobile-based saving and borrowing. Thus
up-scaling  of  the  agri-innovation  wallet
technology  is  tenable  since  Kenya  is  a
frontrunner  in  the  uptake  of  mobile
technology  in  Africa.  The  wallet  proved
adaptable  due  to  its  simplicity  and
affordability  as  farmers  only  required  a

feature  phone  that  is  within  reach  for
many smallholder farmers.

The value  proposition  of  agri-innovation
wallet  is  that  it  incorporates  merchants,
off-takers  and  financial  providers  within
the same ecosystem. Digitizing payments
from  off-takers  to  their  smallholder
suppliers  is  a  strong  entry  point  for
integrating  digital  financial  services  into
agriculture  value  chains.  Otherwise,
smallholder farmers are likely to continue
depending  on  cash  which  is  costly  to
collect, to send and which can be stolen
or  misappropriated.  Digital  payments
reduce  the  frequency  of  transactions
improving  transparency  through quicker,
traceable payments. The high volume of
transactions  in  agricultural  value  chains
creates a multiplier for any inefficiencies,
such as cash payments. Digital payments
facilitate access to financial  services for
smallholder  farmers  by  lowering
transaction costs, providing flexibility, and
improving  the  customer  experience  as
reflected  in  higher  gains  in  yield  and
income.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
Appropriate  electricity  subsidies  should
be put in place to:

 Liberalize interest rates
 Build  the  capacity  of  self-regulating

non-traditional  agricultural  finance
(NTAF)  under  the  Central  Bank  of
Kenya

 Adopt a smart subsidies approach by
only  providing  subsidies that  support

the growth of the NTAF without distorting
the market

Medium-Term
 Develop  a  rural  finance  policy  that

removes barriers to agricultural  finance
and promotes innovation.

 Integrate crop insurance for smallholder
farmers within the Insurance Act.

 Incentivize NTAF through investment in
infrastructures such as roads and power
and network coverage in the rural areas.

Acknowledgements
The  agri-innovation  wallet  learning  project  was
funded through MEDA by IDRC, Canada and was
jointly  implemented  by  University  of  Nairobi,
COIN22 and Dodore Kenya.

References
AGRA  (2015).  Assessment  of  financial

services  landscape  for  smallholder  farmers  in
Ghana,  Kenya,  and  Tanzania.  AGRA,  Nairobi,
Kenya.

Central Bank of Kenya (2015). Annual Bank
Supervision Report. CBK, Nairobi, Kenya.

World Bank (2015). Kenya agricultural sector
risk  assessment.  Agriculture  global  practice
technical  assistance  paper.  World  Bank,
Washington, DC.

Authors
Prof. John Mburu (jmburu@yahoo.com) 
Esther Mujuka (esthermujuka@gmail.com)
Department of Agricultural Economics, University 
of Nairobi, P.O. Box 29053 – 00625, Nairobi, 
Kenya.
Sijmen de Hoogh (sdehoogh@dodore.org)
Vyone Mingate (vmingate@dodore.org)
DODORE Kenya Limited, P.O Box 35501- 00100 
Nairobi, Kenya.
Ad Rietberg (arietberg@coin22.com)
COIN22, Weesperstraat 61, 1018VN, Amsterdam.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

26


