
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Oxygen Concentrator developed at the 
University of Nairobi in 2020

Context
Insufficient  oxygen  levels  in  the  blood,
referred to as hypoxaemia, is a potentially
fatal  complication  of  many  causes  of
mortality. A topical example is the current
COVID-19  pandemic,  a  result  of  the
Coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19),  a
respiratory  tract  infection  that  started  in
Wuhan  province,  China,  in  December
2019, and has rapidly spread around the
world. By February 2021, there were 112
million  confirmed  cases  worldwide  and
2.47  million  deaths.  During  the  same
period,  Kenya  recorded 104  thousand
cases and 1,827 deaths (Worldometers,
2021).  Although  most  people  develop
only mild symptoms, approximately 19%
develop  severe  to  critical  disease
requiring  hospitalisation.  Of  these,
approximately 14% need oxygen support
and  5%  require  admission  to  intensive
care,  often  requiring  ventilator  support
(WHO, 2020).

Medical  Oxygen  can  represent  a
significant  cost  to  hospitals  in  low-  and
middle-  income  countries  (LMICs).
Contributors  to  the  high  cost  include
logistical  challenges  in  transporting
oxygen  that  also  leads  to  intermittent
availability.  The high oxygen cost  to the
patient  can  limit  use  or  lead  to  early
discharge.  Even  where  oxygen  is

subsidised  or  provided  at  no  cost  at
government  health  facilities  and  hospitals,
its  high  cost  often  leads  to  periods  of
unavailability.  Oxygen  concentrators  are
portable devices that remove nitrogen from
the air and are able to produce oxygen at
concentrations  of  85%-95%.  Although  the
use of concentrators could solve the supply
chain  problems  of  oxygen  cylinders,
concentrators come with their  own host of
challenges.  These  include  the  need  for  a
continuous,  reliable  supply  of  electricity
(often  not  available  in  LMICs),  a  robust
system  for  monitoring,  maintenance  and
repair, and a clinical staff trained in their use
(Gray et al, 2017).

Study Approach and 
Results

An exploratory survey was carried out in
Level  2 and Level  3  health facilities in 11
counties  in  Kenya  in  December  2020  to
establish the availability and affordability of
oxygen;  and,  where  available,  the
challenges  faced by  the  facilities  with  the
oxygen delivery systems. Level  2 facilities
include  medical  clinics,  dispensary,  and
mobile  clinics.  Level  3A  includes  basic
health  centres,  while  Level  3B  includes
comprehensive  health  centres,  medical
centres,  nursing  homes,  and  cottage
hospitals.  The  respondents  were  drawn
from  both  public  and  private  hospitals  in

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Health – Equitable, Affordable and Quality Healthcare of the 
Highest Standards

Oxygen Access and Affordability in 
Health Facilities in Kenya
 Prof Madara Ogot, Dr Richard Ayah, Rita Muriuki and Prof James Nyangaya

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

53

Medical oxygen should be 
available in all health facilities
to reduce mortality arising 
from conditions that reduce 
the levels of oxygen in the 
blood. 

New strategies should be put in 
place and new models 
employed to address the 
recurrent costs associated 
with the consistent 
continuous supply of oxygen.

Affordable subsidised supply of 
medical oxygen may increase 
its availability by providing a 
revenue stream in support of 
funding shortfalls in the 
public health system.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Kakamega,  Kilifi,  Kirinyaga,  Kisii,  Kisumu,
Nairobi,  Meru,  Nyandarua,  Mombasa,
Taita-Taveta, and Uasin-Gichu Counties.  A
total  of  285 hospitals were surveyed (193
public, 84 private, and 23 faith-based). 

Availability of Oxygen.  On availability
of oxygen, 65% (192) facilities did not have
any  oxygen  at  all  and  35%  (103)  did.
Segregation by category revealed that 57%
of private hospitals had oxygen, compared
to 25% of public and the same percentage
of faith-based hospitals. Where oxygen was
available, it was delivered through one or a
combination of the following: piped oxygen
(PI),  oxygen  cylinders  (CY),  or  oxygen
concentrators  (CO).   The  distribution  of
oxygen  sources  for  the  different  hospital
categories is presented in Figure 1 (faith-
based hospitals have been combined with
private.)

Figure 1-Oxygen source distribution

Patient  Cost  of  Oxygen.  Of  the  103
hospitals  with  oxygen,  50  (49%)  charged
for  the oxygen and 53 (51%) did not.  Of
those that did not charge, the majority were
public  hospitals.   The  patient  cost  varied
widely among these who charged, ranging
from as  low as  KES 500 ($4.70)  to  over
KES  34,000  ($312)  per  day.  The  table
below provides a  summary of  the  patient
cost distribution.

Table 1-Oxygen source distribution
Patient Cost (KES) Number Hospitals

500-1000 9
1001-4000 7
4001-8000 9

8001-12000 6
12001-16000 2
16001-20000 3
20001-24000 8

>24,000 7
Total Respondents 51

Major Challenges Faced
The study  also  sought  to  determine

the major  challenges faced by hospitals
that used either oxygen cylinders and/or
oxygen  concentrators.  The  literature
suggests that these sources present the
biggest challenges, yet they are the most
available  for  smaller  and rural  hospitals
who may not be able to afford installation
of piped oxygen systems.

Oxygen  Cylinders.  The  top  four
challenges  faced  by  the  hospitals  on
usage  of  oxygen  cylinders  were  as
follows:
1. Access and availability (22% of  all

respondents  to  this  question  cited
this  problem)  Typical  statements
included,  “long  periods  between
refills” and “supply inefficiency”.

2. Short duration of cylinder use (22%)
Typical  statements  included,  “The
oxygen runs out without notice and
there is a patient in need”.

3. Portability (15%) Typical statements
included,  “they  are  too  heavy  to
move  from  one  place  to  another”
and “difficult to carry”.

4. Cost  of  oxygen  cylinders (11%)
Typical  statements  included,
“Sometimes  the  oxygen  runs  out
and there are no funds to refill”.

Seventy-two  hospitals
responded to this question.

Oxygen Concentrators. The top four
challenges  faced  by  the  hospitals  on
usage  of  oxygen  cylinders  were  as
follows:
1. Maintenance Issues (29%) Typical

statements  included,  “fail  to
produce  therapeutic  levels  of
oxygen  because  of  common
problems:  the  air-intake  system,
malfunctioning  sieve-control
valves,  and  contaminated  sieve
materials”.

2. Loss  of  electricity (29%)  Typical
statements included, “Moving them
when  electricity  is  off  to  where
there is generator backup”.

3. Portability (24%)  Typical
statements  included,  “In  case  of
multiple patients in need of oxygen
at the same time it will be difficult to
administer because the facility has
only one concentrator”.

4. Cost of concentrators (8%) Typical
statements  included,  “they  are
expensive”.

Forty-nine hospitals responded to this
question.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Where  oxygen  is  available,  non-

financial challenges were found to out-
weigh financial and are not adequately
addressed.  New  models,  therefore,
must be developed to enable hospital

staff  to  focus  on  the  administration  of
oxygen therapy to their patients, and not
on the oxygen delivery systems.

 For  many  medical  conditions,  lack  of
medical  oxygen  means  certain  death.
The majority of Kenyans are in proximity
to Level 2 and 3 health facilities most of
which  do  not  have  oxygen.  Efforts,
therefore,  must  be  made  to  ensure
oxygen is available at all these facilities. 

 Affordability  remains  a  key  barrier  to
access for patients who need oxygen. In
many  instances,  where  oxygen  is  not
provided at no cost, charges far exceed
the  costs  incurred  by  the  facilities  to
administer  the oxygen.  Guidelines
should  be  developed  for  reasonable
patient costs and should be enforced in
public  health  facilities,  and  private
facilities encouraged to comply.

Medium-Term
 Though desirable to provide oxygen to

patients  at  no  cost,  lack  of  sufficient
funding in the public health system has
resulted in the unavailability of oxygen in
the majority public facilities. New models
should be developed that offer oxygen at
highly subsidised rates  thus providing a
secondary revenue stream to strengthen
health facilities finances.

Acknowledgements
This  work  was  supported  by  the  Open
Society Initiative East Africa (OSIEA).

References
Gray, A. et al., `Improved oxygen 

systems in districts in Laoo PDR: a 
prospective field trail of the impact oon 
outcomes for childhood pneumonia and 
equipment sustainability” BMJ Paediatrics, 
1, 2017.

WHO (2020) Clinical Management of 
severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) 
when COVID-19 disease is suspected. - 
Interim Guidance v1.2 March 13, 2020,

Worldometer, COVID-19 Coronavirus 
Pandemic, updated February 23, 2020, 
accessed February 23, 2020. 
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
?

Authors
Prof Madara Ogot 
(madaraogot@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Nairobi
Dr Richard Ayah 
(ayah@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Public Health
University of Nairobi
Rita Muriuki
(rita.muriuki@uonbi.ac.ke),
University  of  Nairobi  Enterprises  and
Services Limited (UNES)
Prof James Nyangaya 
(janyangaya@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Nairobi

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

54


