
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
Efforts  of  improving  food  and

nutrition security which is one of the Big
Four Agenda of the Kenyan Government
are  constrained  by  the  massive
postharvest losses evidenced in various
value chains. Whereas the set target of
reducing postharvest losses (PHL) from
20% to 15% in the dominant value chains
of  cereals  by  2022  still  remains  on
course, Gogo et al. (2017) estimates the
losses  in  the  African  leafy  vegetables
(ALVs)  in  the country  to be as high  as
71.8%.  The  situation  is  evidently  a
development  priority  especially  for
counties with limited arable land such as
the  arid  and  semi-arid  lands  (ASALS)
which  constitute  the  major  food  and
nutrition  insecurity  hotspots  in  the
country.  Moreover,  micronutrient
deficiencies such as vitamin A and iron
deficiencies have also been found to be
invariably high in the rural areas than the
urban in the country, in as much as these
areas  serve  as  the  producing  areas  of
the micronutrient-rich ALVs.

Cowpea  leaves  (Figure  1)  is  the
most  produced ALV in  the  country  and
has  been  promoted  as  a  food  security
crop due to its rich micronutrient content
(Owade et al., 2020). However, seasonal
availability  of  the  crop  constrains  its
extensive utilization. Moreover, during the
long  and  short  rains  in  ASALs,  the
vegetables  is  in  abundance  but  this  is
followed  by  scarcity  in  the  off-season.
The leafy vegetable has been promoted
over the grains of the crop as a cheap
alternative  source  of  micronutrients
(Mamiro et al., 2011).

Value addition of  fresh produce is
deployed  for  product  diversification  and
postharvest  management  of  produce.
Without postharvest management, Gogo

et  al.  (2017),  reports  economic  losses  of
12.6–34.4%,  further  limiting  vegetable
availability  for  household  utilization  and
commercialization. Policy gaps with regards
to cowpea leaves in the country are evident
due  to  limited  policy  focus  of  this  value
chain as there is limited documentation of
the postharvest losses of any vegetable in
the African Postharvest Losses Information
System. 

Approach and Results
The study utilized components of field

survey  and  experimental  work  in  the
assessment of possible innovations feasible
for  enhancing  vegetable  uptake  and
utilization in the producing areas. The field
survey  employed  mixed  method  study  of
cross-sectional  survey  of  systematically
sampled  405  cowpea  leaves  producing
households and focus group discussion with
processor-farmer  groups  in  the  ASALs  of
Kitui  and Taita Taveta Counties,  with Kitui
having  more  arid  conditions.  Twenty-four
samples  exhaustively  sourced  from
processor-farmer groups were evaluated for
micronutrient retention and trends.

The study results revealed that 72.3%
of the cowpea leaves producing households
were  male-headed  with  farming  as  the
major source of livelihood. Cowpea leaves
were the priority vegetable over other leafy
vegetables  among  84.4%  of  the
households. Households in the drier ASALs
of  Kitui  County  prioritized  cowpea  leaves
more than those in the less dry ASALs of
Taita  Taveta  County.  Prioritization  of  the
cowpea leaves over other leafy vegetables
was due to the high yields of the harvested
vegetables.  The  households  planted  the
crop in dual seasons as per the two rainy
seasons.  The  harvesting  of  the  cultivated
cowpea  leaves  began  as  early  as  two
weeks upon emergence from the soils and

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Agriculture and Livestock

Cowpea Leaves: Feasible Solutions to 
Overcome Seasonal Availability 
Joshua O. Owade, Dr George O. Abong’, Prof Michael W. Okoth and Prof Agnes W. Mwangombe

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

71

Key Messages

Despite the critical role of 
cowpea leaves in the ASAL 
as a food security crop, 
drought, diseases and pests 
remain major challenges to 
be addressed. Prioritizing 
alternative water sources 
and extension services is 
recommended.

The gender of a household head
influences the use of 
cowpeas leaves in the ASAL.
There is need for food 
security initiatives to adopt 
gendered approaches in the 
promotion the value addition 
approaches and utilization of
cowpea leaves.

Even though the cowpeas 
leaves are the main 
vegetables in ASAL 
households, the fresh forms 
are highly perishable; 
households in the ASAL 
areas need to employ the 
complementary utilization of 
both the preserved and fresh
forms to assure food 
security.

Limited knowledge on value 
addition technologies 
coupled with lack of 
equipment remain major 
limitations on processing, 
preservation and improved 
consumption of cowpeas 
leaves. 

Dehydrated products from 
cowpea leaves contain 
adequate amounts of limiting
minerals and hence provide 
possible food vehicles for 
dietary diversification of the 
diets of the populations 
vulnerable to micronutrient 
deficiencies.

Figure 1 – Cowpea Leaves



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

the  harvesting  continued  for  six  weeks.
Households  largely  consumed  cowpea
leaves  in  fresh  form,  but  complemented
their  consumption  with  preserved  forms.
The average availability of the fresh leaves
for household consumption in each of the
seasons was 1 month. Early initiation of the
harvesting increased the availability of the
vegetable among households. The average
intake  of  cowpea  leaves  among  the
households  was  found  to  be  thrice  in  a
week in-season. 

Households  in  more  arid  areas
consumed cowpea leaves frequently, twice
as much as those in the less arid areas.
With  reducing  household  sizes,  the
frequency  of  intake  of  the  vegetables
decreased.  Moreover,  male-headed
households  had  decreased  frequency  of
intake of the vegetables than the female-
headed.  Off-season  consumption  of  the
vegetables reduced among the households
to a quarter of the households. Practise of
traditional  preservation  increased  the
utilization of the cowpea leaves. Traditional
preservation  techniques  practised  among
the households include sun-drying, shadow
drying and combination of sun-drying and
hot-water  blanching  (Figure  2).  The
preference of these techniques among the
households  and  processor  groups  was
informed by the sensory and texture profile,
shelf-life and affordability

The  three  major  challenges  that
constrained  the  production  of  cowpea
leaves among the households in the ASAL
areas were drought and crop diseases and
pests. Yields of cowpea leaves realizable in
each  cropping  season  reduced  due  to
increasing severity of drought in the ASAL
areas. The stakeholders in the value chain
perceived  that  the  crop  has  received
minimal  attention  among  policy  makers
with limited coverage even in the extension
system. 

In the dehydration of cowpea leaves,
the  retention  of  beta-carotene,  vitamin  C,
and minerals determine the efficiency of the
technique.  The  least  practised  technique
among the households that combined hot-
water  blanching  and  sun-drying  yielded
products with the highest retention of beta-
carotene  and  vitamin  C.  Calcium,  iron,
sodium  and  zinc  contents  of  vegetables

that  were  processed using  the  different
traditional  techniques  was  similar.
Utilization  of  the  technique  combining
hot-water  blanching  and  sun-drying,
resulted  in increasing  retention  of  beta-
carotene,  whereas  the  mineral  losses
increased. On other hand, reducing loss
of  minerals  through  use  of  sun-drying
techniques  only  resulted  to  increased
losses  of  beta-carotene.  However,  the
preserved products of cowpea leaves still
provided adequate nutrient content to aid
meet  the  recommended  dietary
allowance.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 There is need for increased promotion
of  the  complementary  use  of  the
preserved  and  fresh  forms  of  the
vegetable in the ASALs.

 The current techniques of sun-drying
and  shadow-drying  without  the
inclusion  of  the  pre-treatment  of
blanching offer  limited advantages in
nutrient  retention,  thus  food  security
initiatives  should  help  fast-track
transition  to  the  hurdle  technology
concept that combines blanching as a
pre-treatment in dehydration.

 Promotional  activities  on  value
addition  approaches  and  capacity
building  at  the  farmer  group  levels
need to be enhanced.

Medium-Term
 With  agriculture  as  a  devolved

function,  the  devolved  units  should
explore  further  and  mechanized
techniques  coupled  with  capacity
building of farmers in effort to address
food and nutrition insecurity.

 The  devolved  units  also  need  to
improve the  policy  focus  on cowpea
leaves as one of the food and nutrition
security  crops.  Strengthening  of  the
extension system as a delivery mode
of  the  value  addition  technologies  is
necessary.

 Long-term  investments  in  the  value
chains of the ALVs (including setting up
of  processing  plants)  is  necessary  in
order to help address the constraints of
limited marketing and commercialization
of  their  produce.  Future  plans  should
focus  on  irrigation  and  provision  of
extension  services  to  assist  farmers
address the current challenges.  

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  part  of  the  thesis
undertaken  in  2021  as  part  of  the  larger
project  of  Fruits  and  Vegetables  for  All
Seasons  (FruVaSe)  Project  funded by  the
German Government.

References
Gogo,  E.O.,  Opiyo,  A.M.,  Ulrichs,  C.,

Huyskens-Keil,  S.,  2017.  Nutritional  and
economic  postharvest  loss  analysis  of
African  indigenous  leafy  vegetables  along
the supply chain in Kenya. Postharvest Biol.
Technol.  130,  39–47.  https://doi.org/
10.1016j.postharvbio.2017.04.007

Mamiro,  P.,  Mbwaga,  A.M.,  Mamiro,
D.P., Mwanri, A.W., JL, K., 2011. Nutritional
quality and utilization of local and improved
cowpea  varieties  in  some  regions  in
Tanzania. AJFAND 11, 4490–4506.

Owade,  J.O.,  Abong,  G.O.,  Okoth,
M.W., Mwang’ombe, A.W., 2020. A review of
the  contribution  of  cowpea leaves  to food
and nutrition security  in  East  Africa.  Food
Sci. Nutr. 8.
https://doi.org/10.1002/fsn3.1337

Authors
Joshua O. Owade 
owadehjm@gmail.com
Dr George O. Abong’  
georkoyo@yahoo.com
Prof Michael W. Okoth 
mwokoth@uonbi.ac.ke
Prof Agnes W. Mwangombe 
wakesho123@gmail.com
College of Agriculture and Veterinary 
Sciences, University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 29053-00625, Nairobi, Kenya

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

72


