
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
The  un(der)-banked  lack  financial

histories  and  financial  strength  to  be
attractive to financial institutions, and this
limits  their  ability  to  access  credit.   In
2015,  around  36.1  percent  of  Kenyans
were classified as poor. Access to micro-
credit loans through financial technology
(Fintech)  can  promote  individual
outcomes while contributing to several of
the  United  Nations’  Sustainable
Development  Goals  (Hove  and  Dubus,
2019). 

Some  of  the  un(der)-banked
perceive technology to be risky and not
easy to use. A study in 2016 found that
M-Pesa had lifted 2 percent of Kenyans
out of poverty and reduced the unbanked
population  (Hove  and  Dubus,  2019).  A
Financial  Access  Household  Survey  in
2016 noted that individuals seek financial
products  that  cater  to  their  small  and
inconsistent  incomes,  offer  better  tools
for managing day to day transactions and
risks, while supporting them to face major
life transitions (FSD, 2016). This profile of
consumers  requires  an  innovative
approach, for example,  through the use
of  big  data  and  artificial  intelligence
deployed  by  Fintech  firms,  to  cater  for
their  lack  of  financial  histories  in  the
credit lending process. The availability of
soft  information means that Fintech can
cater  for  this  market  gap  to  further
enhance  financial  inclusion  if  vibrant,
competitive  and  sound  credit  market
practices are introduced and enforced. 

The  level  of  financial  access  is
measured through the  number  of  firms,
people  and  households  receiving  credit
and  using  other  financial  products;  a
means to increase financial  inclusion to
foster economic development. The future
of  Kenya’s  credit  access  is  Fintech,  as
penetration of smartphones is 91% and
availability  of  big  data  continues  to
permeate  our  lives  providing  the  soft
information for automated credit decision-
making  processes.   Fintech’s  ability  to
develop  more  consumer  sensitive
products, tap into the evolving consumer
perceptions,  behavior,  trust  and  access
will drive sustainable credit usage.  

There  is  a  correlation  between
financial  trust  and  credit  usage  with
multiple  sources  of  information  altering
consumer perceptions of credit. In 2018,
there  were  6  million  digital  loan
borrowers  in  Kenya,  and  the  numbers
were  increasing  daily.  However,  of  the
10.6 million borrowers listed in the credit
reference  bureau  in  2017,  around  2.7
million  are  negative  due  to  non-

performing  loans  and  of  which  400
thousand are listed due to amounts below
US$ 2.0, credit from Fintech firms (Gubbins
and Totolo, 2018).

Approach and Results
The study adopted a mixed methods

research design to determine the influence
of  Fintech on credit  usage.  The data was
collected in 2015 from 8,665 households in
a survey on financial access and usage in
Kenya,  covering  knowledge  and
understanding  of  financial  products  and
services.

The logistic regression analysis found
that overall  credit  usage depended on the
source  of  financial  advice  (B=-0.52,
p<0.001),  how  they  trust  the  financial
institution (B=0.78, p<0.001), cost of credit
(B=0.47, p<0.001) and the characteristics of
the  financial  products  on  offer  (B=0.29,
p<0.001). This highlights that the reputation
of the Fintech, availability of credit at market
rate and developing of products to meet the
consumer needs are attractive in increasing
Fintech usage as a source of credit among
the un(der)-banked.

Desktop  reviews  brought  out  three
messages.  First,  technology  is  instant  to
register, score, allocate and disburse credit
even  for  consumers  with  scanty  financial
histories,  thus  creating  wider  access  and
usage. Second, changing consumer trends
and behavior, propensity to use technology
among young consumers, and social media
influence the dynamics in the credit market
through  Fintech.  Third,  the  market
regulators  need  to  increase  public
awareness,  form  a  joint  coordinated
approach  and  a  sound  regulatory
framework  to  enhance  the  competition  in
the market among the players.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 Develop  a  coordinated  and  regulatory
approach to spur competition among the
Fintech and general financial ecosystem
in Kenya.

 Encourage Fintech firms to improve trust
through  the  design  of  the  purchase
process to increase consumer attention
to the loan terms and conditions. 

Medium-Term
 A  sound  regulatory  framework  is

required  to  minimize  Fintech perceived
technological  risk,  enhance competition
and  protect  the  consumers  from

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Financial Services

Role of Fintech in Enhancing Credit 
Usage Among the Un(der)-Banked 
 Dr Davis Bundi Ntwiga

Market regulator need to 
develop mechanisms to 
make digital loan data 
publicly available to assist in 
drawing broad market 
trends. 

Need to tame predatory lenders 
to protect the consumers and
competitors and increase 
consumer trust through a 
sound regulatory framework.

Level the playing ground through
common market standards to
enhance competition and 
business conduct for the 
regulated and unregulated 
digital lenders. 

Key Messages

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

65



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

predatory  lenders.  Regulation  will,
amongst  others,  increase  consumer
protection through privacy in use of data
from  utility  bills,  social  networks,
insurance  claims  and  bank  account
transaction details without their consent.

 Assist the market players to improve on
cyber-risk  controls  due  to  new
technologies and business models. 

Acknowledgements
This policy brief is the outcome of a larger
research study entitled “Can Fintech Shape
the Dynamics of  Consumer  Credit  Usage
Among  the  Un(der)  banked?”.  The

research  was  funded  by  the  Kenya
Bankers  Association  Research
Conference in 2018. 

References
Financial  Sector  Deepening  (FSD)

(2016).  2016  FinAccess  Household
Survey. Collaborations between Financial
Sector  Deepening,  Central  Bank  of
Kenya  and  Kenya  National  Bureau  of
Statistics, Nairobi.

Gubbins,  P.,  and  Totolo,  E.  (2018).
Digital  credit  in  Kenya:  Evidence  from
demand-side  surveys.  Financial  Sector
Deepening, Kenya.

Hove, L., and Dubus, A. (2019). M-Pesa
and Financial Inclusion in Kenya: Of Paying
Comes Saving? Journal of Sustainability, 11
(568): 1-26

Ntwiga, D.B. (2018). Can Fintech shape
the  dynamics  of  consumer  credit  usage
among the un(der) banked? Kenya Bankers
Association  Research  Conference,
September 2018, Nairobi, Kenya

Authors
Dr Davis Bundi Ntwiga, 
dbundi@uonbi.ac.ke,
School of Mathematics, 
University of Nairobi, P.O Box 30197-00100,
Nairobi, Kenya

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

66

mailto:dbundi@uonbi.ac.ke

