
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
There  are  36  million  people  living  with
HIV  in  the  world  of  which  52  percent
reside in sub-Saharan Africa. Around five
million  young  people  aged  between  15
and 24 years live with HIV. Adolescents
and youth (12–24 years) account for over
40  percent  of  HIV  incidence
globally (Global Statistics, 2018).
Kenya comes in third in the highest HIV
incidence  among the  youth  in  the  East
and  Central  African  region  and  second
highest in the prevalence of HIV among
the youth. According to statistics from the
National  Aids  Control  Council  (NACC,
2015),  there  are  238,987 young people
between the ages of 15 to 24 years living
with HIV. By the end of 2015, a total of
171,510  people  were  living  with  HIV  in
Nairobi  County,  with  14  percent  being
young  people  aged  15-24  years.  The
Nairobi  County  HIV  &  AIDS  Strategic
Plan notes that viral suppression among
the youth stands at 59 percent (Strategic
Plan, 2015). 

Antiretroviral  therapy  (ART)  is
highly  effective  in  suppressing  viral
replication, reducing the amount of virus
in  the  blood to  undetectable  levels  and
slowing  the  progress  of  HIV.  To  attain
viral suppression, thwart the development
of resistant strains, and decrease disease
transmission,  progression  and  death,
high levels  of  adherence (more than or
equal to 95 percent) are necessary due to
the  capability  of  the  virus  to  rapidly
replicate and effortlessly mutate (Roser &
Ritchie,  2019).  The  frequently  used
indicator for adherence is viral load (VL).
VL results  equal  or  greater  than  1,000
copies/ml of blood is a strong indicator of
non-adherence to ART.

Mbagathi  District  Hospital  in
Nairobi has approximately 300 youth (15-
24yrs) on ART. Viral load suppression for
this  group was  63 percent  for  the  year
2016.  Between  2016  and  2017,  40
percent  of  the  youth  initiated  on  care
were lost to follow up. The youth do not
feel  free  to  share  their  issues  with
clinicians and counsellors who are much
older  than  them  for  fear  of  being
condemned.  Similarly,  the  counselling
approach used is ‘old school’ and fails to
attract  the  youth  who  would  prefer
interactive  modern  sessionS  that  are
more  appealing  to  them  (MacCarthy  et
al.,  2018).  The  youth  also  lack  peer
mentors/counsellors  and  exposure  to
peer advocacy campaigns to encourage
them  in  their  journey  towards  viral
suppression. Ignorance and poor attitude
to ART also contributes to non-adherence

as well as a lack of disclosure of their HIV
status to their families and friends.

Study Approach and 
Results

Youth  is  a  challenging  period  of  time
whereby  high-risk  sexual  behaviour  in
addition  to  other  misdemeanour  like
alcoholism,  tobacco  smoking,  etc,  are
common  and  this  has  led  to  a  lack  of
engagement with healthcare services. This
had  led  to  poor  adherence  to  ART  with
subsequent high viral load results. 

In  this study,  the youth were asked to
select members from amongst themselves
who  would  be  trained  as  peer
counsellors/mentors.  The  purpose  was  to
create ownership of the process so that the
youth could pick members with whom they
had  confidence  and  could  freely  discuss
issues bothering them. This also removed
bias from the project team. 

Selected  youth  were  taken  through
capacity  building  where  they  emerged  as
peer  mentors/counsellors.  The  training
covered  topics  including:  Roles  and
responsibilities  of  peer  mentors;  Anti-
retroviral  therapy;  Communication  and
counselling  skills;  Identifying  and  tracing
people  who  do  not  return  to  the  clinic;
Healthy relationships, stigma, discrimination
and disclosure.

After  the  training,  the  youth  received
certification  as  peer  mentors/counsellors.
They were then tasked with spearheading
the  peer  advocacy  campaigns  targeting
their peers who were non-adherent to ART.
They mobilized them to come to the clinic
for ART by personally reaching out to them
through phone calls and home visits. They
encouraged their peers to continue with the
journey  of  treatment  and  adherence.
Similarly, they took charge of their monthly
counselling  sessions  and  provided  the
much needed peer-to-peer counselling in a
manner that only they could since they were
sailing in the same boat. 

The  clinicians  who  were  previously
offering  the  sessions  had  not  received
capacity-building  on  HIV  care,  service
delivery  and  youth  friendly  HIV  services.
The  majority  of  these  counsellors  were
older  and  this  becomes  a  barrier  to  the
youth’s uptake of the treatment literacy and
counselling programme because the youth
could not freely engage with them.

A  treatment  literacy  toolkit  was
developed that included a Mobile App and a
training manual. Stakeholders involved (the
youth  and  the  clinicians)  were  consulted
during  the  development  of  the  toolkit  for
purposes of ownership. The toolkit provided
current  information  concerning  treatment

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Health

Enhancing Antiretroviral Therapy 
Adherence Among the Youth
Angela W. Maina and Dr Naomi Mwangi

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

75

There is need to involve the youth
as major stakeholders with 
regard to matters concerning 
their health and wellbeing.

It is important to leverage on 
technology to come up with 
innovative digital solutions to
solve current health 
challenges.

Youth peer counsellors ought to 
be engaged in hospitals to 
allow the youth to more freely 
share their issues.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

regimens.  The  App,  “Kuwa  Smart”,  is
available on Google Play Store and can be
freely downloaded onto mobile phones. 

The idea behind the App was to bridge
the  gap  between  the  clinicians  and  the
youth.  A majority  of  the  youth  could  not
attend  the  monthly  treatment  literacy
sessions due to various reasons including
lack  of  finances  and  time  as  a  result  of
work or school. Therefore, with a one-time
download  of  the  App,  they  were  able  to
access  treatment  literacy  information
wherever  and  whenever  they  needed  it.
Similarly,  the  comprehensive  care  centre
operates  only  from  8am  to  4pm  on
weekdays which proved challenging for the
youth.   The  operating  hours  were  not
friendly to them as most preferred to come
to  the  clinic  in  the  evenings  or  over  the
weekends. 

The  contents  of  the  treatment  literacy
toolkit  include:  HIV  background;  anti-
retroviral  therapy;  sexually  transmitted
infections  and  opportunistic  infections;
sexual  and  reproductive  health;  HIV  and
nutrition; and exercises and counselling in
HIV & AIDS.  The App is extremely relevant
in  today’s  digital  age  and  was  positively
welcomed  by  the  youth  who  are  both
technophiles  and tech savvy. The training
manual was given to the clinicians and they
adopted it  as  the  standard  manual  which
was  used to provide treatment  literacy to
the youth during their monthly meetings.

Information sharing is key with regard to
viral  suppression and in the management
of HIV/AIDS because an undetectable viral
load reduces the risk of transmitting HIV.  It
is  important  that  use  of  technology  and
more  youth  sensitive  methods  of  sharing
information  be  adopted  to  reduce
stigmatization.  The  viral  load suppression
for the year 2018 increased to 70 percent.

In addition, 15 percent of the youth who
had been lost to follow up, resumed the
ART treatment.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 It  is  imperative  to  seek  the

participation  of  all  stakeholders
involved in a project especially when
dealing  with  young  people.  This  is
because they succumb easily to peer
pressure  and  can  easily  influence
each other against a certain project. 

 It is important to embrace a bottom-up
decision-making  approach  during  all
stages of a project as opposed to top-
down  approach  for  successful
implementation  and  ownership
purposes. 

 It  is  important  to avoid a judgmental
attitude  towards  HIV-positive  youth
because  a  majority  of  them  are
actually born with the virus.

Medium-Term
 It  makes  much  more  sense  for  a

young person living with HIV to learn
about treatment literacy from another
youth  living  with  HIV  than  a  mature
counsellor who perhaps does not live
with  the  virus  and  has  to  employ
theoretical  knowledge when it comes
to  delivery  of  the  treatment  literacy
sessions.

 The  peer  mentoring  and  counselling
course is a short course which should
be encouraged and embraced by the

Government  so  that  the  graduates  of
this course get employed to specifically
handle the needs of their peers in both
public and private facilities. 

 In the wake of the COVID pandemic, it is
crucial  to  come  up  with  lasting  digital
health solutions that can bridge the gap
between  the  patients  and  healthcare
providers  and empower  the patients  to
take charge of their health.

References
Global  Statistics.  (2018). HIV.gov.

https://www.hiv.gov/hiv-basics/overview/dat
a-and-trends/global-statistics

MacCarthy,  S.,  Saya,  U.,  Samba,  C.,
Birungi,  J.,  Okoboi,  S.,  &  Linnemayr,  S.
(2018). “How am I going to live?”: exploring
barriers  to  ART  adherence  among
adolescents  and  young  adults  living  with
HIV in  Uganda. BMC Public  Health, 18(1).
doi: 10.1186/s12889-018-6048-7

NACC,  2015.  Fast  track  plan  to  end
adolescent  AIDS  and  stigma  -  National
AIDS Control council.

Nairobi  City  Council  HIV  &  AIDS
Strategic Plan. 2015/16-2018/19.

Roser,  M.,  & Ritchie,  H. (2019).  HIV /
AIDS. https://ourworldindata.org/hiv-aids

Authors
Angela W. Maina
angela.wairimu@gmail.com  
University of Nairobi Institute of Tropical 
and Infectious Diseases
Dr Naomi Mwangi
nmwangi@uonbi.ac.ke, 
Open, Distance & e-Learning Campus, 
University of Nairobi 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

76


