
RESEARCH TO  
COMMERCIALISATION 
EXPERIENCES IN 
UGANDA & MALAWI

Dr. Julianne Sansa-Otim (PhD)
Senior Lecturer & Team Leader,  IoT-ra lab, 
Makerere University
www.iot-ra.net
Vice Chairperson, Ubuntunet Alliance
sansa@cit.ac.ug

UC 2023, Kampala, UG

http://www.iot-ra.net/


Panel Outline
Effective Knowledge Transfer - Dr.
Julianne Sansa-Otim

COVID-19 PPE & Hygiene Tools case study 
in Malawi - Prof Nancy Chitera

Postman case study in Uganda - Dr. Grace Kamulegeya

IoT-ra lab AWS & Smart bee hive case studies in Uganda - Dr. Isaac 
Mugume

Universities safeguarding their Intellectual Property 
- Canon Goddy Muhanguzi Muhumuza

RENs’ role in facilitating the transfer of academic knowledge to the industry -
Prof. F. F. Tusu Tusubira



01

vAddressing societal challenges is the main motivation for Research
& innovations

vMost innovations end at “PoC” stage and fail to penetrate the target
market

vBased on case studies, systems & structures that support the
commercialisation process are discussed

v Informal and formal modes of cooperation have been used in the
observed knowledge transfer

vFormal cooperation leads to deeper commitment / accountability
hence superior solutions

Effective Knowledge Transfer



01

v Innovations must be demand-driven i.e. with real clients
v Industry must be engaged to standardise the process of
technology scaleup
vAfter PoC, stakeholder mapping and validation is critical to confirm
business case
vBusiness collaboration expose innovators to valuable
commercialisations experiences but NDAs are vital for IP protection
• Incubators: validate product, roll out MVP, define business model, marketting plan
• Accelerators: identify investors, prep for seed funding, support in pitching
• i-hubs & coworking spaces for affordable facilities and services (legal, accounting,

consultancy)
vFunding support is critical for scaling up, otherwise good ideas are
shelved

Bridging the gap between research and practice



CASE STUDY 1



grace.kamulegeya@mak.ac.ug
Email

Innovation 
Commercialisation

Dr Kamulegeya Grace 
B(PhD)



Outline

The innovation-commercialisation 
pipeline

The University Software Product Maturation 
Cycle

Postman as a Commercialisation Success 
story



Technology commercialization involves
transforming innovative ideas or technologies
from research settings into marketable
products or services for profit generation. In
software innovation, this involves converting
ideas into commercially viable products or
services that can be sold to clients or
customers.

Technology 
Commercialisation 



The innovation-
commercialisation pipeline

Idea Generation: 
Unleashing 
Creativity

Feasibility Study: 
Evaluating 

Viability

Prototype 
Development: Bringing 

Ideas to Life

Intellectual Property 
Protection: 

Safeguarding 
Innovation

Funding and 
Investment: 

Fueling Growth

Brainstorming
and
conceptualizing
innovative
software ideas

Evaluate the 
technical, 
financial, and 
market feasibility 
of the software 
concept.

Develop a functional 
prototype or proof-
of-concept to 
showcase the key 
features and 
capabilities of the 
software.

To protect software
innovation, use
patents, copyrights, or
trademarks to prevent
competitors from
unauthorized use and
replication.

Secure funding to 
develop, market, 
and scale the 
software product.



The innovation-commercialisation 
pipeline (Cont’d)

Product 
Development: 

Crafting Market-
Ready Solutions

Market Testing 
and Validation: 

Refining for 
Perfection

Launch and 
Marketing: Making 

Waves in the Market

Post-launch Support 
and Updates: 

Enhancing User 
Experience

Develop the 
software into a 
complete, 
market-ready 
product

Validate the 
product-market fit 
and identify 
potential issues by 
introducing the 
software to a 
small audience 
and gathering 
feedback.

Develop marketing 
strategies to 
successfully launch 
the software in the 
market, create 
awareness, attract 
users, and drive 
sales.

To improve the 
software's 
functionality, 
security, and user 
experience, provide 
continuous 
customer support 
and release frequent 
updates and 
patches.



The University Software 
Product Maturation Cycle

01



Postman in a nutshell
Postman App Limited, founded in 2018, is a free mobile
application available on IOS and Google Play Stores that
offers last-mile delivery services to the Ugandan public.
Its primary features include generating National
Postcodes and Address Codes, which can be used to
dispatch and receive goods from anywhere in Uganda.
The codes are provided to players in the courier/logistics
ecosystem as a Software as a Service (SaaS). POSTMAN
maintains a national-scale digital infrastructure that
supports the needs of both the public and private sectors
and has received accreditation, funding, and grant
support from various sources.



Postman- Commercialisation 
Timeline 

Company Formation2017

Signing of a Government 5-year Concession

Signing of a grant  agreement

Completion of the Minimal Viable Product

2020

2020

2017

2022

2023 Full commercialisation  with an Venture capitalist



Postman Ug: Our Commercialisation 
Journey

Inventor or team 
with a dream

An idea was translated 
into a business venture 
by formulating and 
analyzing basic ideas 
on paper for a business 
opportunity.

Evidence of Business 
Opportunity through 

Experiments
Postman conducted 
active research and 
development to assess 
the market potential, 
competition, and 
technology.

Ability to work on focused 
programs with project 

teams.

The technological and 
business components 
were tested to ensure 
compatibility, and an 
initial business plan was 
created.

Ability to support project 
engineering development 

and design, with no product 
or revenues.

The integration of basic 
technology and business 
components was 
supported reasonably.



Postman Ug: Our Commercialisation 
Journey

Ability to support 
market-driven product 

development and 
design, even without 

revenues.
A prototype was tested in a 
relevant environment, but the 
venture was not yet ready for 
commercialization due to an 
incomplete business team. 
However, a comprehensive 
business plan covering market, 
operational, technological, and 
financial aspects was available.

Capable of supporting 
limited production with a 

full business team in 
place, including product 

and limited revenues.

The business to operate 
on a small scale was 
developed as the 
complete team was 
already in place.

Ability to Scale Production 
and Distribution (Product 

and Revenue)

The technology and 
venture structure were 
proven effective in 
supporting growing 
market shares.

A successful business 
necessitates proper 

infrastructure, staffing, 
increasing market share, 

and revenue growth.
The business successfully 
integrates new 
technology and gains 
market share through 
operational usage.



Postman in the field

Residential postcode

Business
postcodes



Guild of Professional 
Software Engineers 
and IT Practitioners

Thank You
F o r  Y o u r  A t t e n t i o n



CASE STUDY 2





















































CASE STUDY 3
Dr. Isaac Mugume



The drive to research
l Re-think the partnership between academia and industry to 

avoid ineffectual partnerships (Fransman & Newman, 2019);

l What research is being carried out? Basic – so as to publish as 
many papers as possible? 

l Move to differential weighting of commercialized products

l 6 criteria for R&D projects → technology, marketing, finance, 
intellectual property, resource & beneficial impact (Karaveg, et 
al., 2014)



Research environment in Uganda

l The government of Uganda actively supports research → NARO, 

UNCST, STI-President Office, RIF-Mak, & several Presidential 

initiatives;

l High pay for Scientists right from Secondary School Teachers;

l Support to promising research initiatives e.g. the Kiira Motors 

corporation;

l Wide range of donor support → NORAD, DANIDA, World Bank, 

DAAD, Welcome Trust, Bill & Mellinda Gates, SIDA, KOICA, JICA, 

USAID ...



The case study of IoT-ra lab AWS
l In 2013, the WIMEA-ICT project funded 

by NORHED embarked on improving 
weather information management in EA;

l The solutions ranged from NWP, WDR, 
AWS, WIDS → at the center was 
research;

l The AWS were tailor made at low cost 
and deployed to improve density of 
network in Ug. Tz & S.S

l Research; and engagement of industry 
was a critical success factor



The case study of IoT-ra / 
AdEMNEA Smart Bee Hive

l Bees, the key plants pollinator are being threatened due to 
the anthropogenic applications of chemical spraying;

l Monitoring the health of bees is thus critical; but how do you 
monitor without distroting their habitat → smart bee hive

l With the growing apiary industry, the smart bee hive is 
envisaged to make both scientific and commercial case



Key references
l Fransman, J. & Newman, K. (2019). Rethinking research partnerships: evidence and the politics of 

participation in resaerch partnership for internal development

l Karaveg, C., Thawesaengskulthai, N., & Chandrachai, A. (2014). Evaluation model for research and 
development commercialization capbility 



Universities
safeguarding their 
IP











WHAT IS TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER (TT)
TT is a collaborative process that allows scientific findings, 
knowledge and Ipto flow from Creators/Innovators, such as 
University Reasearchers, Staff, Students and Other Research 
Istititutions, to private and public users.
TT is the movement of data, designs, inventions, materials, 
software, technical knowledge or trade secrets from one 
organisation to another or from one purpose to another. The TT 
process is guided by the policies, procedures and values of each 
organization/University involved in the process.



TT can be categorized into three basic types:
1) Technology push which takes place when a University 

or company patents its invention and licenses it to 
other companies.

2) Market pull-which is when new technologies are 
developed in response to demand for a product or 
service. 

3) Technological spillover- where firms can acquire 
information created by others without infringement.



Benefits of TT- Everyone wins
Ø Public benefit.
Ø Community engagement.
Ø Corporate engagement.
Ø Attribution and recognition.
Ø Translation of academic discoveries for greater 

good.
Ø Support for regional economic growth and 

development.
Ø Revenue generation.



Ø Another important function of TT is to help scientists to 
gather pre-seed Research & Development (R&D) funding 
(Max Planck Innovation, 2015) and to reduce the asymmetric 
information or ‘‘information failure’’ problem by sorting 
unprofitable from profitable innovations.

Ø Efficient intellectual property (IP) management gives a 
business an advantage over its competitors and is key to market 
dominance. Market know-how is therefore a valuable business 
asset which must develop to create new IP assets, which in turn 
gives the business a competitive edge in the marketplace.



It is therefore essential for every University to build an IP 
protection strategy to manage and protect the results of any  
intangible assets, including the creation of an in-house IP 
department or TT Office (TTO),
Ø specialising in the protection of the assets,
Ø supporting innovation and 
Ø development



IP Assets include:

1.Patents & Utility models,
2.Trademarks
3.Copyright
4.Industrial Designs
5.Geographical Indications
6.Trade secrets



Patent
§Protects new and Inventive solutions.

§A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention
which is a product or a process.

§ The product or process should provide in general, a new
technical solution to a problem of any industry.

§ The exclusive rights are territorial and patent protection
is granted for a limited period, generally 20 years.



Requirements for patentability
§Novel/new– must have some new characteristic which is not known in

the body of existing knowledge in its technical field (prior art).– The
invention should not be described in any publication published
anywhere in the world.

§ Inventive – The new product or process should not be obvious to a
skilled person with average knowledge of the technical field.

§ Industrially applicable- Invention must be useful/ have utility.
§The subject matter must be accepted as patentable under the national

patent law. (scientific theories, mathematical methods, plant or animal
varieties, discoveries of natural substances, methods for medical
treatment are examples of things that are not patentable).



Utility Model
ØA Utility Model just like a Patent also protects
inventions/innovations but for a shorter period. The main
difference between a Patent and Utility Model is that the
requirements for granting a Utility Model are less stringent
than for Patents.

ØA Utility Model is commonly referred to as a “Petty
Patent”. In practice, protection for utility models is often
sought for innovations of a rather incremental character
which may not meet the patentability requirements. The
term of protection for utility models is 10 years.



Utility Model con’t

• For example, the ball pen is an existing invention but you 
observe that when exposed to air the quality of ink 
decreases so you have come up with the cover and that 
cover is the utility model - a development to an existing 
invention, or for pen you have created the eraser and that 
is also an improvement or part of.



Who protects the intellectual property?

ØEmployer/University/Funder
ØInventors, designers, developers and authors can protect the 
ideas they have developed, for instance by means of 
copyright or patents. The aim is to prevent others from 
wrongly profiting from their creations or inventions. It also 
gives them an opportunity to earn back the money they 
invested in developing a product



Trademarks

•These are signs, symbols, labels, logos, names, slogans that
identify and distinguish goods and services. They are on
every product. The idea is that everyone is manufacturing
that particular product or doing that particular service, so
there is necessity to allow users to distinguish.
•Registration is required to guarantee protection.



Trademark cont’d

ØTM may be any word, symbol, slogan, logo, sound, smell,
colour, drawing, symbol, letters, numerals or a combination
thereof.
ØTM must be distinctive.
ØNot deceptive or misleading to customers.
ØNot violate public order or morality.



Copyright

ØProtects literary and artistic works
ØLast for the lifetime of the author plus fifty years after
his/her death
ØProtects: songs, books, poems, publications, art pieces,
sculptures, arrangements of music, mobile apps etc.
ØCopyright subsists from the moment the work is created.



INDUSTRIAL DESIGNS
Industrial Designs

§Design is the unique outer appearance of a product.
Industrial designs are what make an article attractive
and appealing Designs can be seen everywhere:
bottles, shoes, clothing, cars, cups.
§Protect the appearance of a product.
§Lasts for a total of fifteen(15) years depending on 
renewal
§Protects; Shapes, colour, texture, patterns etc
§Registration is required to protect the object.



Geographical Indications

ØProtect the unique characteristics that products derive
from their geographical location.
ØProtection is indefinite dependent on renewal
ØAllows producers in a region to gain value through the
unique qualities that can only be attributed to the region
eg. Soil quality, PH climate etc.



Trade Secrets

ØProtects information that is important to the success of
the business but is not publicly known for the purpose
of maintaining a competitive advantage.
ØProtection is indefinite as long as the information is
not disclosed.
ØProtects: recipes, formulas, client lists, growing
conditions, methods of doing business (Coca Cola
formula has been protected the special taste of
Coca-Cola for more than 130 years only



ROLE OF A UNIVERSITY IP 
UNIT/DEPARTMENT OR TTO 

• Before creating a specialised IP department, a business must first 
ascertain what is required of such a department. 
• An IP department specialises in a multitude of issues, but its general role 

within a University is centred around:
• Identifying and Ordering the business’s existing IP rights
• Advising on securing IP Rights and Protections
• Identifying solutions to minimise costs, including the costs of IP: 
Ø Registration 
Ø Applications 
Ø Renewals and,
Ø Reducing Management Costs
Ø Negotiating and Drafting
Ø Licences and,
Ø Rights Transfer Agreements



STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION
The structure and organization of TTOs can affect its overall 
performance and can vary among universities. Since TTOs deal with 
both academic research and industry, they consist of a diverse set of 
individuals, including:
Ø Scientists;
Ø Lawyers;
Ø Analysts;
Ø Licensing Experts; 
Ø Financial Experts; and
Ø Business Managers. 



By having individuals (particularly different scientists, engineers, and 
analysts) with varying sets of expertise in research, TTOs attempt to 
more effectively assess, protect, and profit from the research 
developments taking place in multiple disciplines throughout the 
university (wikepedia)
TTOs can by classified into three different types or models of 
operation:
Ø Internal: existing as an integrated part of the university and 

controlled by university administration.
Ø External: existing as an independent company that does not 

operate under the control of university administration.
Ø Mixed: having components of both internal and external TTOs.



SITUATION ANALYSIS
Global Context
Ø In recent decades, almost all research universities in the US and

Europe have established Innovation and Technology Transfer Offices
(ITTOs) to commercialize their IP.

Ø In the US, the Association of University Technology Managers (AUTM
2013) reports that the annual number of patents granted to U.S

universities rose from less than 300 in 1980 to 5,145 in 2012, while

licensing of new technologies has increased almost six-fold since 1991.

Ø Annual licensing revenue generated by US universities rose from

$160million in 1991 to $2.6 billion in 2012.

Ø *University based startup companies numbering 705 were launched in

2005 alone; while 6,834 new firms based on university owned

intellectual property have been created since 1980.*



NATIONAL CONTEXT
According to the 2017-2017 Global Competitiveness Report, Uganda is
ranked 77th with regard to Innovation and 104th in terms of Intellectual
Property Protection (IPP).
Ø The 2019 Global Innovation Index ranks Uganda at 102 out of the

129 countries compared to Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania ranked at
77, 94 and 97 respectively. The country’s expenditure on R&D was
only 0.4 percent of GDP, business expenditure on R&D was 0.01
percent and the country logged about 250 patent applications with
only 2 registrations.

Ø Todate, the level of IP registration in Uganda remains low, compared
to other countries.



JUSTIFICATION
ØThe Vision 2040 has set a target of 6000 patents registered per year by the 

year 2040.
ØThe National Development Plan III (2020/2021 – 2024/2025) has set a target 

of 50 Intellectual Property Rights registered per year by the year 2025 
through various interventions including strengthening the Intellectual 
Property (IP) value chain management. 

ØInstitutions of Higher Learning are expected to produce a large percentage of 
these patents on the basis of the research and knowledge activities they 
undertake. 

ØPolicy Objective 3(c) of the National IP Policy aims to adapt and exploit IP 
driven technology transfer and commercialization through strategy that 
purposes to establish institutional Technology Transfer Offices (TTOs) for 
effective and sustainable transfer, adaptation and exploitation of technologies.



RENs’ facilitating
role in the transfer
of academic
knowledge to the
industry 



Panel 

Interaction


