
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
The  coconut  palm  is  mostly

cultivated in Kwale, Kilifi, Mombasa, Tana
River,  Lamu and Taita-Taveta  Counties.
It  is  grown  in  different  agro-ecological
zones  at  the  coast  and  plays  an
important role in the economy. The total
number of plants in the Kenyan coast is
approximately  4.4  million,  with  an
average nut yield of 1.5 tonnes/ha, while
that of copra is as low as 0.45 tonnes/ha.
Over  80  percent  of  coastal  farm
households  (about  2.4  million  people)
derive their livelihood directly or indirectly
from coconut and its by-products.  

Almost  all  coconut  tree  parts  can
be  used  in  either  making  commercial
products  or  meeting  the  food
requirements of rural communities (Teulat
et al., 2000), an indicator of its economic
value. Coconut production contributes an
estimated 1.5 percent to the agricultural
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and 0.4
per cent  of  Kenya’s GDP. Compared to
other  African  countries,  Kenya  has
lagged  behind  in  technology
development  for  coconut  product
diversification  and  product  utilization
reducing the overall value of the crop to
our economy.

The potential value of the coconut
sub-sector  is  estimated  at  US$180.6
million.  But  the  actual  value  is  only  25
percent of that (US$44.5 million) annually
and  consists  of  nuts  (mature  and
immature-madafu)  accounting  for  about
24  percent,  coconut  wine  (60  percent),
Makuti roofing  materials  (12  percent),
brooms (3.3 percent) and coconut wood
(1 percent). 

The low level of productivity is due
to old and unproductive orchards – the
East African Talls (EAT) with no designed
improvement programme since they were
introduced in Kenya,  inadequate quality
planting material,  lack of fast means of
generating  clean  planting  materials,
unavailability of improved varieties and a
general  lack  of  value  addition
(Muhammed et  al.,  2013).  Slow growth
and long pre-breeding period of palm  is
also a factor (Rajesh et al., 2008).

Additionally, there is no medium- to
long-term  coconut  breeding  programme
in Kenya to breed varieties to replace the
over-cultivated EAT, East African Dwarfs
(EAD), and their incidental hybrids. This
has  prompted  farmers  to  rely  on  their
current crop to get seedlings. There are
also  some  individual  farmers’  efforts

including Gazi Farm Enterprises Ltd, which
produce  and  sell  unimproved  coconut
seedlings.  

Coconut research in Kenya (and the
rest  of  the world)  is hindered by the long
juvenile  phase of  palms,  the  high  cost  of
conducting investigations, long-term of field
evaluation,  lack  of  research  funding,  and
lack of use of robust DNA and tissue culture
technology. 

Approach and Results
Coconut  trees were characterized in

situ  and  leaf  samples  collected  for  DNA
analysis  at  the  coastal  counties  of  Kilifi,
Kwale, Lamu, and Tana River. The objective
was  to  characterize  the  Kenyan  coastal
lowland  coconut  using  morphological  and
DNA  markers.  Sampling  was  done  at
different  agro-ecological  zones.  The  focus
was  in  areas  where  palms  grown  were
morphologically  different  with  a  marked
change  in  altitude  or  cropping  systems,
existence  of  a  formidable  barrier,  or  local
people  ethnically  different  (in  terms  of
dialect)  from  previous  collection  sites.
Sampling was done in both large and small
scale farmers’ fields. 

Morphological  characterization
(qualitative and quantitative traits) was done
according to the procedure as given in by
International  Plant  Genetic  Resources
Institute  (IPGRI)  in  1995.  For  genetic
analysis,  DNA  was  extracted  from  leaf
samples and used to assess how coconut
trees were closely or distantly related based
on their DNA profiles.

Several  different  morphological
features  were  observed  but  generally,
differences  in  morphology  did  not  follow
geographical  areas  from  which  coconut
trees  were  grown  (see  Figure  1).  This
suggests  that  there  is  an  exchange  of
planting  materials  among  the  coastal
farmers across the region. 

Narrow  genetic  differences  were
reported  among  and  with  the  materials
studied. Three DNA groups were realized.
Groups were made of mixtures of materials
from  all  the  counties.  There  were  also
subgroups  within  the  three  groups.  The
presence  of  subpopulations  in  all  the
clusters  and  different  levels  of  similarity
between the localities  showed overlapping
of same materials at the coast region.  This
is because the materials have close genetic
relationship among them and similar genetic
materials are spread across Kenyan coast. 

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Agriculture and Livestock

Improvement of Coconut Production 
in Kenyan Coast for Income 
Generation 
Dr Maurice E Oyoo

Key Messages

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

69

Kenya has lagged behind in 
technology development for 
coconut production, product 
diversification and product 
utilization.

Morphological variation exists. 
This variation cannot be 
exploited reliably because 
it’s uncertain how it will 
impact on nut production. 

There is narrow genetic variation
among coconut trees at the 
Kenyan coast. This hinders 
meaningful crop 
improvement. 

Research on coconut is 
hindered by the long juvenile
phase of palms and long-
term of field evaluation.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Colour of Stalk and Immature Nuts

Bole Category

Fruit Morphology

Vertical Stem Descriptors

Crown Morphology

Fruit (without Husk) Appearance/Shape

Figure 1 – Quality Characteristics and their
frequencies for the germ plasm studies.

Further analysis showed that there is
a high genetic similarity (over 0.95) with a
low genetic distance (0.011) of coconut in
farmers’ field across Kenyan coast (Figure
2). There is also a very narrow variation (2
percent)  among coconut  trees  pointing  to
the  fact  that  more  variation  exists  within
individual coconuts as opposed to among
groups based on the areas where they are
produced.  These  results  clearly  indicate
that  Kenyan  coconut  have  a  shared
ancestry,  making  them  close  or  distant
relatives.  As  a  result,  they  cannot  be
adequately  and  meaningfully  exploited
during  plant  improvement  programmes
through hybridization. This means that if a
crossing  programme  was  initiated,  gene
exchange between individuals would result

in  marginal  crop  improvement  due  to
relatedness.

Figure  2a  –  Comparison  of  Genetic
Distance Among Counties

Figure  2b  –  Comparison  of  Genetic
Similarities Within Counties

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 Deliberately  introduce  and  evaluate
materials with potential qualities form
the International Coconut Gene Bank. 

 A  multidisciplinary  team  should
monitor  and  document  attributes  of
seed  nuts  brought  into  Kenya  from
India  in  2018  and  planted  in  a
quarantine  site  at  KALRO-Matuga,
Kwale County. Their attributes, based
on coconut  descriptors,  IPGRI  1995,
should documented.

 Support  individual  farmers  who
produce  and  sell  EAT  and  EAD
coconut  seedlings  to  multiply
improved varieties once identified.

 Staff  training  in  national  research
centres  and  universities  on  modern
plant breeding and rapid multiplication
techniques using molecular tools.

 Promoting  conservation  through  use
by  establishing  farmer  community-
managed coconut  seedling  nurseries
and linking germ plasm conservation
and  use  with  research  and
development.

Medium-Term
 Establishing  a  coast  region-based

coconut  breeding  programme
equipped with tissue culture facility for
optimized  and  rapid  regeneration  of
superior and clean parental materials
for sale to farmers.  

 There should be conservation strategy
whose  components  should  include
conservation in a national field based
in KALRO-Mtwapa or  Matuga and in
situ and on-farm conservation. In vitro
embryo  culture,  somatic
embryogenesis  and  cryopreservation
should be considered.

 Establishment of a coconut value chain
with emphasis on input-output structure.

Acknowledgements
The  author  is  grateful  to  NACOSTI  for
funding.  This  brief  is  derived  from  ‘The
morphological and genetic characterization
of  coconut  in  Kenyan coast’.  I  thank  Prof
Mwangi  Githiri  (JKUAT),  Dr.  Muhammed
Najya (Pwani  University),  Agriculture Food
Authority  and  KALRO  Mtwapa  for
assistance, and Dr Grace Kibue (Egerton).

References
Abdulsamad,  A.  (2016).  Connecting  to

the  World  Market  through  Regional  Value
Chains:  Partnership  Opportunities  in
Coconut  Value  Chain  for  the  Small
Caribbean Economies.

Dasanayaka  PN,  Everard  JMDT,
Karunanayaka  EH,  Nandadasa  HG
(2009).Analysis  of  coconut
(CocosnuciferaL.)  diversity  using
microsatellite  markers  with  emphasis  on
management  and  utilization  of  genetic
resources. J. Natl. Sci. Found. 37:99-109.

Gethi  JG,  Malinga  WK  (1997.  Kenya
Coconuts: Present Past and Future: Pp155-
158.  In:  CP  Topper.  PDS  Caligari,  AK
Kallaya, SH Shomari, PAL Masawe and A.
Mpunani  (Eds).  Proceedings  of  the
International  Cashew  and  Coconut
Conference:  ‘Trees  for  Life-Key  to
development’.  Bio-Hybrids  International,
Reading, UK.

IPGRI  (1995).Descriptors  for  Coconut
(CocosnuciferaL.).International  Plant
Genetic Resource Institute, Rome, Italy.

Oyoo,  ME,  Muhammed N,  Githiri  SM,
Ojwan’g PO, Muniu FK, Masha E, Owuoche
J.  2015.  In-situ  morphological
characterization  of  coconut  in  the  coastal
lowlands of Kenya. African Journal of crop
science vol. 9(2):65-74

Oyoo,  ME,  Muhammed  N,  Kimani  N.
Cyrus  and  Simon  M.  Githiri.  2016.
Assessment  of  the  Genetic  Diversity  of
Kenyan Coconut Germplasm Using Simple
Sequence  Repeat  (SSR)  Markers.  African
Journal  of  Biotechnology.  Vol.  15(40),  pp.
2215-2223.

Muhammed  N,  Hashim  S,  Shauri  H,
Malinga  J,  Kashindi  G  (2012).
Dissemination  of  market  access  and
technology  information  among  coconut
farmers:  a  case  study  of  Kilifi  County  in
Kenya. Int. J. Agric. Sci. Vol. 2 (5), 153-156.

Rajesh MK, Arunachalam V, Nagarajan
P,  Lebrun  P,  Samsudeen  K,  Thamban  C
(2008). Genetic survey of 10 Indian coconut
landraces  by  simple  sequence  repeats
(SSRs).  ScientiaHorticulturae  118(4):282-
287.

Authors
Dr Maurice E Oyoo
mauriceoyoo464@gmail.com
Department of Crops, Horticulture and Soil 
Science, Egerton University
P O Box 536-20115, Egerton,  Kenya

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

70


