
Landscape Restoration in Kenya
Stocktaking of Key Innovations and 
Strategies



1. Introduction
In Kenya, forest and landscape restoration (FLR) is a high priority on the 
government’s agenda, reflected by the large number of initiatives, legislations 
and policies associated with addressing degradation. These government 
policies, when implemented with strong communities’ participation, can also 
be part of a national strategy to implement the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs). While these initiatives demonstrate a strong commitment 
to FLR and associated ecosystem services, implementing them at scale 
requires proper planning and assessment of the existing opportunities and 
resources. Towards this end, the Government established a multi-stakeholder 
Landscape Restoration Technical Working Group (LRTWG) in 2014 led by 
the Kenya Forest Service (KFS) to spearhead this planning and assessment 
processes.

The LRTWG carried out an assessment of potential restoration opportunities 
and identified the most pressing land use challenges, restoration options 
and opportunities. This study is part of this process and sought to undertake 
a survey of a selection of successful FLR projects in Kenya, from which 
lessons can be drawn and scaled up to the national level. With a focus on 
key innovations, this work aims at providing a key building block towards a 
National Restoration Strategy, which will drive Kenya’s stated ambitious goal 
of restoring 5.1 million hectares of land – including forests, rangelands and 
croplands – by 2030.

2. Process

2.1 Project selection

This process set out to undertake a national survey of restoration initiatives 
that are considered successful from which lessons on key ingredients for 
successful restoration, particularly scalable innovations, could be learnt. 
Ideally, the process sought a good mix of the following key aspects:

• Land tenure: ideally a mix of public, communal and private lands

• Spatial scale: preferably bigger, but about 10 ha restored area

• Temporal scale: preferably longer, but a minimum of three years of 
operation

• Restoration goal: ideally a mix of environmental, economic, socio-
cultural goals

• Geographic and administrative coverage: preferably covering 
multiple eco-agricultural zones and diverse habitats, straddle several 
counties

• Nationally-determined landscape restoration options: ideally have 
a representation of most if not all seven options: Afforestation/
reforestation, Rehabilitation, Agroforestry, Commercial plantation, 
Silvicultural/rangelands, Waterbodies/riparian, and Roadways.

Based on these criteria, the following 11 projects were selected for inclusion in 
this exercise (Table 1). They had a relatively good national coverage, included 
the three sectors (cropland, forest and rangelands) and covered six of seven 
areas of the National Landscape Restoration Options (only Roadways were 
not represented). In addition, a short case description of one of the ongoing 
REDD+ projects in Kenya – the Kasigau Corridor REDD+ project was included. 
Although this is a forest protection and not a restoration programme per se, 
it was felt that there were some similarities and important lessons, especially 
around community engagement and payment for ecosystem services (PES) 
that could be shared from this programme to enrich the FLR discussion in 
Kenya towards the achievement of national target.

2.2 Indicator selection
The key question for scaling up is what determines the success or failure of landscape 
restoration efforts. These key drivers have been classified into three thematic areas which 
were used to formulate the indicators for this study:

1. Clear motivation: all key stakeholders aware of the need for 
landscape restoration and be inspired or motivated to support it, i.e., 
have a shared vision. 

2. Enabling conditions: ecological, policy, legal, social, and/or 
institutional conditions need to be in place to create a favourable 
context for landscape restoration at scale.

3. Effective implementation: adequate capacity and resources need 
to be mobilised to implement the restoration activities on a sustained 
basis on the ground.

3 Key findings and recommendations for 
the National FLR Strategy

There was widespread agreement on most of indicators for the selected projects, and 
despite their variation in activities and desired end-points, all the project implementors 
felt that their restoration programmes could be considered successful. Tellingly, success 
was determined by effective implementation of project activities because they did not 
have a pre-defined ecosystem or social end-states they were aspiring for. Further, 
all the projects had some key hallmarks of sustainability including policy backing, 
strong motivation driven by both need and benefits, multiple stakeholders working in 
partnership, innovative mechanisms, dedicated champions/leaders and stable funding. 
Some projects were predetermined in their areas of operation (e.g., based on forest 
reserve or group ranch sizes), while others had no predefined areas selected for 
restoration and were designed to grow organically. Both models—predetermined and 
indefinite—will be crucial when scaling up as national restoration efforts will need to 
embrace either strategy in different contexts. The key findings worth considering when 
scaling up restoration efforts were grouped into five main categories:

Case# Project Name County Land Tenure Area (Ha) Yrs Habitat NLR Option

CS01 TIST Meru Private 15,000 14 Cropland Agroforestry/ 
Afforestation

CS02 Naibunga Rangeland Laikipia Community 47,000 14 Lowland 
savanna

Rehabilitation

CS03 Bathi River 
Rehabilitation

Kiambu Mixed 16 6 Highland forest Riparian

CS04 Tupande Pamoja 
Initiative

Kiambu Public 30 7 Highland forest Rehabilitation

CS05 Mikoko Pamoja Kwale Mixed 117 7 Mangrove Afforestation/ 
Reforestation

CS06 PELIS-Geta Forest Nyandarua Public 863 9 Highland forest Commercial 
plantation

CS07 FMNR-World Vision-
Mogotio 

Baringo Private 2356 6 Cropland Silvicultural/ 
Rangelands

CS08 Kenya Agricultural 
Carbon Project

Bungoma& 
Kisumu

Private 45,000 9 Cropland Rehabilitation/ 
Agroforestry

CS09 Komaza Forestry Kilifi & Kwale Mixed 3800 10 Lowland dryland 
forest

Agroforestry/ 
Afforestation

CS10 Sondu Miriu River 
Afforestation

Bomet Public 156 5 Lowland forest Afforestation/ 
Reforestation

CS11¥ FMNR-Samburu-
SAPLIP

Samburu Mixed 3 Cropland Rehabilitation/ 
Agroforestry

¥ This World Vision project was provisionally included and visited in Samburu, but the proponents were unable to furnish the required information for the full Case Study description

Table 1: The key elements of the 10 projects included as Case Studies in this stocktaking exercise

3.1 Major innovations

Amongst the strategies the 
projects employed, all had one 
that they considered as the primary 
innovative feature of their restoration 
programme. The key five main 
innovations were:

3.1.1 Payment for Ecosystem 
Services (PES)

This was mainly through certification 
and sale of carbon credits and was 
a potent restoration motivator that 
propelled reforestation especially 
on private and communal land. 
However, revenues from carbon 
sales were generally low, so this 
had to be carefully promoted 
to communities to manage 
expectations. Nonetheless, there 
seems to be a positive outlook 
for smallholder carbon payment 
schemes and projects where 
besides the carbon, farmers 
are helping control soil erosion 
and improve soil fertility leading 
to improved productivity which 
ultimately results in improved food 
security and improved livelihoods 
for rural people. Kenya can earn a 
lot in this PES area from the Kasigau 
Corridor REDD+ Project (Annex 1: 
Case Study 10 in the detailed report) which has been actively selling verified 
carbon credits in the voluntary market for close to 10 years now.

3.1.2 Plantation Establishment and Livelihood Improvement Scheme 
(PELIS)

This is a programme where communities are engaged in rehabilitation and 
reforestation activities on public land. They are offered a piece of land for 
farming for free (in gazetted forest areas) and in return provide labour for 
planting and nurturing for seedlings until they form a closed canopy after 
which they stop farming and let the forest establish. With proper management 
to ensure the system was not abused, e.g., by the farmer not planting or 
tending the trees in the right way, this offered a low-cost way to achieve 
reforestation and improve local livelihoods.

3.1.3 Commercial forestry
This provided a strong economic incentive for reforestation. While trees are 
primarily grown for timber products, it could be structured in a way that also 
enhances the environment and provides some social goals too, like soil 
improvement and livelihood support from fodder, fruit and nuts.

3.1.4 Farmer-managed Natural Regeneration (FMNR)
This is essentially a farm-based forestry or agro-forestry approach that the 
farmers can apply on their private lands for multiple benefits including wood 
products, fodder and soil stabilisation. It is a low cost, replicable laissez faire 
approach to restoring and improving agricultural, forested and pasture lands 
through letting trees and other natural vegetation regenerate without much 
replanting. When planned well, this is compatible with the farmers’ normal 
farming activities and thus has minimal opportunity cost for the participating 
farmers; it can also be augmented by planting which will move towards 
EverGreen Agriculture in croplands1.

3.1.5 Livestock bunching or pooling
This was a unique innovation for rangeland restoration which involved setting 
aside areas for settlements, livestock and wildlife to manage numbers and 
avoid conflicts and degradation from overstocking. It can incorporate assisted 
natural regeneration of the rangelands (akin to FMNR as described above) 
whereby some areas were fenced off and not grazed during the wet season 
to enhance vegetation recovery and provide dry season fodder2.

1 www.worldagroforestry.org/evergreen_agriculture or Garrity et al 2010. Evergreen Agriculture: a 
robust approach to sustainable food security in Africa. Food Security 2(3): 197-214

2 A similar restoration example was described in Tanzania (Buckingham and Hanson, 2015. The 
Restoration Diagnostic. Case Example: Shinyanga Region, Tanzania, WRI): A core aspect of 
the program has been the revival of a traditional practice called “ngitili,” a Sukuma tribal word 
meaning “enclosure” or “fodder reserve”. Ngitili involves closing off from livestock an area of 
standing vegetation—including grasses, shrubs, and trees—from the onset to the end of the 
rainy season. The ngitili area is only opened up for grazing at the peak of the dry season

3.2 Key strategies

3.2.1Dealing with previous degradation drivers
Most of the restoration initiatives had to deal with more than one driver of 
degradation and thus required different strategies for addressing them. 
The drivers of degradation identified were predominantly associated with 
overuse (overharvesting and overstocking) which was mostly addressed by a 
combination of awareness and replenishing the resource rather than removing 
the threat per se. A wide variety of restoration actions were undertaken for 
the selected projects, which was expected because different stages of 
degradation call for different strategies and actions, ranging from abiotic, to 
biotic or management-related. For these projects, most of the degradation 
was at the biotic barrier level, mainly requiring biotic and management-related 
interventions for restoration. There were only few projects that involved abiotic 
level actions, mainly soil stabilisation. This points to the importance of any 
national restoration efforts understanding the nature of the degradation 
factors they were trying to address before designing the restoration strategy.

3.2.2 Sustainability or exit plan
That most of these restoration projects were voluntary schemes not anchored 
on or required by any policy demonstrates that with the right set of incentives, 
people on private or communal land can freely engage in restoration towards 
the national target. To this end, it is important to align the restoration goals 
with the community or landowner’s goals. This is important because several 
of the selected projects were designed to grow freely without a predetermined 
restoration area; they are driven by farmer-to-farmer learning which is based 
on aligned goals. It was also clear that there was a vital need for a restoration 
champion for each restoration site or exercise, and have a portfolio of funders 
for stability. While the selected projects all had strong champions behind them 
and consistent funding, the diversity of champions and funders demonstrates 
that the identity of the champion or funder is not as critical as their presence. 
Projects with a diversity of funding e.g., receiving private or public-sector pre-
financing or donor grants to develop the proof-of-concept, then harnessing 
private sector funding including carbon markets seemed most stable and 
able to expand organically by attracting new participants.

3.2.3 Costs and benefits distribution
All selected projects had three major costs (funding, labour and some opportunity costs 
often involving use of land), but several also had Research and Development (R&D) 
costs. While the funding, labour and opportunity costs are often factored into restoration 
budgets, R&D costs should also be included as they sometimes play a vital supporting 
role that could make or break the restoration programme. Similarly, all selected projects 
had a combination of economic, social and environmental goals and benefits, and it was 
also clear that the structure should ensure benefits accrue to the lowest level (individual) 
before spreading to the household and eventually broader community and the other key 
stakeholders that were involved (Government, NGO, private sector). To implement this, 
there needs to be a simple but robust monitoring system that enables all stakeholders to 
benefit to the degree they participate or in proportion to their effort.

http://www.worldagroforestry.org/evergreen_agriculture


4 Potential models for scaling-up 
restoration

This study generated several important considerations for scaling up 
restoration across the different sectors and national restoration options 
towards achieving the national target. These were classified into the following 
three land ownership categories: public, communal and privately-owned land:

4.1 Public land: mainly forests

4.1.1 National landscape restoration option(s)
Activities under this category will largely fall under afforestation or reforestation, 
rehabilitation, waterbodies or riparian, and roadways, and to a lesser extent, 
commercial plantation, silvo-pastoral or rangelands and roadways. 

4.1.2 Key motivations
These are characterised by having the environment as the chief restoration 
goal and a pre-defined restoration area. There are likely to be only a few 
opportunity costs brought in by the restoration initiative as the areas will have 
already be designated for their intended use.

4.1.3 Key enablers
These are typically linked to some government policy, and are likely to have 
a combination of government and donor (e.g., bilateral grants) funding. In 
addition, engagement with the local communities living around any target 
landscape will still be critical for their long-term success.

4.1.4 Keys to implementation
Programmes such as PELIS seem to present an opportunity for deep 
engagement with the community, building in social goals to the programme, 
and potentially cutting project costs and risks. Likewise, encouraging 
community participation e.g., by provision of labour or sale of seedlings 
seems to be a good way for these projects to build ownership and critical 
grassroot support. 

4.2 Communal land: mainly rangelands

4.2.1 National landscape restoration option(s)
Activities under this category will largely fall under silvo-pastoral or rangelands 
and rehabilitation, and to a lesser extent, afforestation or reforestation, 
waterbodies or riparian, and commercial plantations.

4.2.2 Key motivations
These will be characterised by having multiple restoration goals, and often 
a pre-defined restoration area. These landscapes will predominantly be 
unprotected areas that are often organised as group ranches or similar other 
community land designation (former Trust Lands).

4.2.3 Key enablers
Although they will often not be linked to a specific government policy or 
legislation, they have potential for a cross-section of funding sources, 
spanning public and private sector, as well as donor (e.g., NGO) funding.

4.2.4 Keys to implementation
Restoration would need to combine socio-economic and environmental goals 
and there will be moderate opportunity costs, both land-related but also 
related to economic displacement. For long-term success, these projects will 
require a champion within the community who is committed to the initiative 
and helps mobilise support and funds for the project.

4.3 Private land: mainly croplands

4.3.1 National landscape restoration option(s)
Activities under this category will largely fall under afforestation or reforestation 
and rehabilitation (especially soils), and to a lesser extent, riparian zones, 
commercial plantations, and silvo-pastoral or rangelands.

4.3.2 Key motivations
Restoration initiatives in this category are characterised by having the socio-
economic goals as the primary goal, and typically happen over an indefinite 
restoration area.

4.3.3 Key enablers
They will often not be linked to a specific government policy or legislation, but their open-
endedness gives them immense potential for growth. They will often have a combination 
of private sector and donor (e.g., NGOs) funding, with great potential for government 
funds too.

4.3.4 Keys to implementation
Private lands introduce an important challenge due to their use: they are 
typically agricultural lands that are the primary source of livelihoods for the 
owners. As such, dealing with drivers of degradation will perhaps be most 
intricate in this category. This also means that restoration initiatives will 
have to work closely with the landowners from the outset to ensure that the 
restoration goals align with their objectives for the land, and that opportunity 
costs (which are high in this category) do not outstrip the potential benefits. 
For long-term success, these projects also require champions—often positive 
deviants within the community—who are committed to drive support for the 
project within their communities.

5 Conclusion
The restoration initiatives included in this stocktaking exercise provide a 
pointer of the major ingredients that should be considered when looking at 
scaling to sub-national levels. It is also worth remembering that depending on 
the land ownership, the goals, or at least primary focus, of restoration might 
be different to ensure acceptance and sustainability. Either way, based on 
the goals of the restoration initiative, there should be some monitoring effort 
to ensure progress is made and help adaptively improve the project during 
implementation because they will typically be long term projects. As such, 
in line with the national FLR roadmap, after the initial mapping, the current 
stocktaking and assessment of enabling conditions should naturally lead to 
the design of potential restoration strategies at the national level, including 
monitoring frameworks.

For more information, please, contact: 

Mr. Alfred N. Gichu, 
Head: Climate Change Response Program,
Kenya Forest Service,
National REDD+ Coordinator & Focal Point,
Ministry of Environment & Forestry ,
P.O. Box 30126-00100
NAIROBI, Kenya.
Tel: +254- 020-2219622,
Mobile: +254-7227874033,

Email: alfredgichu@yahoo.com; alfredgichu@kenyaforestservice.org


