
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
    The  creation  of  the  Ramsar
Convention (RC) on wetlands in 1971 has
prompted the continuous designation that
protects  global  wetlands  within  the  170
member  countries.  Currently  there  are
over 2,400 Ramsar sites. Education and
awareness  are  the  key  to  support
wetlands  protection.  The  RC  has
continued to establish wetlands education
centres  under  the  Communication,
Education and Public Awareness (CEPA)
programmes  to  connect  people  with
nature and increase their awareness on
the  use  of  wetlands  and  their
sustainability.  Today, there are over 300
CEPA  centres  across  the  globe
supporting  community  education  in
conservation.

Since 1900, over 64 percent of
the  world’s  wetlands  have  disappeared,
with the highest wetland loss, of about 35
percent,  occurring  between  1970-2015.
Losses have been driven by high demand
for  water,  settlements,  urbanisation,
encroachment,  and pollution resulting in
the  declining  value  of  environmental
services  that  wetlands  provide  (Shah,
2016). The study sites of Lakes Nakuru,
Naivasha,  and  Bogoria  are  examples
where  wetlands  have  deteriorated  and
their  current  use goes against  the RC’s
concept of “wise use”. Lack of sufficient
education  results  in  wetlands  not  being
viewed as  valuable  to  both  human and
environmental  needs.  In  line  with  the
value attached to the wetlands, RC has
developed  educational  programmes
designated to improve public awareness
and  community  participation.  The
education  aspect  was  adopted  at  the
Conference of Parties (CoP) 7 under the
CEPA  outreach  programme.  CEPA  is
continuously  strengthened  at  every
annual  CoP, with countries  encouraged
to  develop  their  national  CEPA  Action
Plans. 

Kenya  signed  the  RC  on
October 5, 1990 and ratified it on June 5,
1991. Today, Kenya has six Ramsar sites
namely  Lakes  Nakuru,  Naivasha,
Baringo,  Bogoria,  and  Elementaita  and
River  Tana.  To  successfully  implement
the RC goals, the country has developed
several  legal  frameworks  and  policies
that  are  designed  to  create  awareness
and educate communities on the value of
protecting  wetlands.  These  include  the
Wetlands Conservation and Management
Policy  (GoK,  2015),  Wetlands
Conservation and Management Act (GoK,

2013b),  Environment Policy (GoK, 2013a),
Sessional Paper No. 6 on Environment and
Development  (GoK,  1999),  the  National
Constitution of Kenya (GoK, 2010) and the
Environmental  Management  and  Co-
ordination (Conservation and Management
of  Wetlands)  Amendment  Regulations
(GoK, 2017). By 2012, when CoP 12 was
held in Romania, Kenya had developed a
national  plan  including  subnational  plans,
basin-level plans and site-related plans, in
line with the CEPA programme.

Study Approach and 
Results

This study analysed the significance of
education  at  influencing  communities  to
conserve  and  protect  three  inland  RC
designated  lakes  in  the  East  African  Rift
Valley:  Lake  Nakuru,  Lake  Naivasha  and
Lake Bogoria. L. Nakuru was Kenya’s first
Ramsar designated site on June 5th, 1990
as Ramsar  site  number  476 based on its
support of the lesser flamingo population at
1  percent  (Criterion  VI  for  Ramsar  sites).
Lake  Naivasha  was  designated  on  the
October  4,  1995  as  Ramsar  site  number
724 due to its habitat and food provision to
over 350 resident and migrant bird species,
including  1  percent  of  the  world  Fulica
cristata population;  fish;  and  hippos  and
waterbucks, around the riparian parts of the
lake.  Lake  Bogoria  was  designated  on
August  27,  2001  as  Ramsar  site  number
1097 as  it  is  a  refuge site for  the  Lesser
Flamingo and more than 300 bird species. It
is also a habitat for endangered mammals
such as the Greater Kudu.

Lake Naivasha is a very delicate site in
Kenya, as it was almost transferred to the
Montreux  list  of  threatened  sites  in  2008
due to problems of uncontrolled pollution. In
contrast to Lakes Nakuru and Bogoria, this
lake consistently  faces deforestation in  its
basin  and  is  experiencing  increased
deterioration of water  quality, fish mortality
and  decreasing  fish  stock,  increased
encroachment  and  transformation  of  the
lakeshore  riparian  zone,  invasive  species,
increased  population  and  unplanned
settlement  (Shah,  2016).  This  lake  is
surrounded  by  private  land  and  is  not
legally gazetted as a protected area under
Kenyan  law  unlike  Lakes  Nakuru  and
Bogoria. Before 2010, the riparian land was
under  the  custody  of  the  Lake  Naivasha
Riparian  Association  formed  in  1927.
However,  under  the  new  constitution  of
2010,  the  national  government  has
custodianship of this land (GoK, 2010).

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

The Future to Conservation of 
Ramsar Sites: Environmental 
Education And Awareness
Dr Parita S. Shah and Prof George Atisa

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

79

Education and awareness of local 
communities is key to the 
survival of inland wetlands. 

Partnerships between 
communities, public and 
private institutions is the way
forward.

Educational curricula must be 
revised to start teaching 
citizens at all levels to 
understand the benefits of 
wetlands conservation and 
sustainable development.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Through  education,  communities  can
be sensitized on how various activities such
as  industrial  pollution,  improper  waste
disposal, deforestation and poor sanitation
damage  wetlands.  Lake  Naivasha  and
Lake Nakuru are surrounded by urban and
modern  agriculture-based  activities  while
Lake Bogoria is surrounded by pastoral and
rural farming communities. Communities in
the  three  study  sites  share  two  common
characteristics.  First,  current  formal  and
informal education does not teach the skills
and  the  value  of  environmental  con-
servation.  Second,  the  majority  of  the
residents  are  primary  and  secondary
school graduates (see Figure 1). These two
characteristics  are  likely  the  main  reason
these lakes continue to deteriorate. 

Figure  1  -  Education  Levels  Around  the
Three Study Sites. 

The study findings show that education
in primary and secondary schools has very
little  to  do  with  teaching  environmental
protection thus does not influence wetlands
protection  at  community  level.  The
education  system  is  structured  almost
entirely  to  develop  professionals,  for
example,  in  the  fields  of  education,
accountancy,  medicine  and  law,  not
environmental sciences. Communities only
see  the  value  of  conservation  when they
benefit  economically  from  the  wetlands.
This  is  in  part  because  the  education
system  has  not  created  significant
conservation awareness and inculcation of
environmental values in the communities.  

Furthermore,  the  policies  proposed by
the RC are constrained by factors that drive
settlements and migration toward proximity
to  wetlands.  These  factors  include  weak
national  and  local  land-use  regulations,
limited  economic  opportunities  in  many
local  areas,  scientific  knowledge,  lowly
educated local populations and inadequate
exposure  to  global  policies.  For  effective
protection  of  inland  wetlands,  individual
landowners,  their  communities  and  local
authorities must be engaged and willing to
develop  and  adopt  specific  policy  and
wetlands  protection  initiatives.  Often,  a
stimulating force or an influencing variable,
such as education or awareness, must be
present  through  schools,  conservation
organizations  or  the  government  for
effective adoption of RC goals. 

Another  important  stimulant  can  be
through  partnerships  that  provide
platforms  for  the  cross-pollination  of
scientific knowledge, education and skills
and  cultural  understanding  among  all
actors (Atisa, 2020). The designation and
the  presence  of  the  Kenya  Wildlife
Service  and  other  international
conservation  organizations  in  Kenya
should  have  significant  influence  on
raising  awareness  and  thus  improved
wetlands protection but the results show
otherwise. This was found to be the case
because it appears that there are no strict
land-use  and  settlement  regulations
being imposed by  any  organization.  No
organization, therefore, is visible from this
perspective. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Start  developing  mechanisms  to

revise  formal  and informal  education
to include teaching conservation. 

 Effective  participation  in  decision-
making  to  strengthen  the  focus  of
creating education and awareness.

 Enforcement  of  both  public  and
private  partnerships  so  as  to  make
CEPA successful.

 Enforcement  of  land-use  laws  that
protect fragile landscapes.

Medium-Term
 Benefit  sharing  from  wetlands  to

ensure  that  the  communities  benefit
financially and economically.

 Capacity building of communities and
authorities  to  integrate  wetlands
protection  into  settlement  and  land-
use regulations.

 Create  awareness  of  sites  being
designated under RC and the role of
international,  national  and  local
organisations  towards  environmental
conservation. 

 Educational  curriculum  to  be
structured  to  teach  young  people  to
see  nature,  specifically  wetlands,  as
needing to be preserved.

 Create  partnerships  between
government,  conservation organizations
and  the  communities  to  address
conservation challenges. 

 Educate  all  communities  to  raise
awareness  of  protected  areas  and  the
need to conserve wetlands irrespective
of perceived benefits. 

 Gender equality in terms of education for
better  decision  making  of  natural
resources.

Acknowledgement
This policy brief is the outcome of larger

research  study  'Domestication  and  App-
lication  of  Biodiversity  Related  Multilateral
Environmental  Agreements  in  Kenya'  by
Parita  Shah  in  2016  and  the  recently
published  paper  entitled  ‘Environmental
education and awareness: The present and
future key to the sustainable management
of  Ramsar  Convention  sites  in  Kenya’  in
International  Environmental  Agreements:
Politics, Law and Economics 1-20, by Parita
Shah and George Atisa

References
Atisa.  G.,  (2021).  Environmental

education and awareness: The present and
future key to the sustainable management
of  Ramsar  Convention  sites  in  Kenya.
International  Environmental  Agreements:
Politics, Law and Economics 1-20.

GoK. (1999). Sessional Paper No. 6 on
Environment and Development.

GoK. (2010). The National Constitution
of Kenya.

GoK. (2013a). Environment Policy. 
GoK.  (2013b).  Wetlands  Conservation

and Management Act.
GoK.  (2015).  The  Wetlands  Con-

servation and Management Policy.
GoK.  (2017).  Environmental  Man-

agement  and  Coordination  (Conservation
and Management of Wetlands) Amendment
Regulations.

Shah, P. S. (2016). Domestication and
application  of  biodiversity  related
multilateral  environmental  agreements
(MEAs) in Kenya. PhD Thesis, University of
Nairobi.

Shah.  P.  and  Atisa,  G.  (2020).  Policy
adoption,  legislative  developments,  and
implementation:  the  resulting  global
differences  among  countries  in  the
management  of  biological  resources.
International  Environmental  Agreements,
20, 141–159

Authors
Dr Parita S. Shah
parita@uonbi.ac.ke
Department of Geography and 
Environmental Studies, University of 
Nairobi, P. O. Box 30197, 00100, Nairobi
Prof. George Atisa
george.atisa@utrgv.edu
Department of Public Affairs and Security 
Studies, University of Texas, Rio Grande 
Valley, Edinburg, TX 78539, USA.

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

80


