
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
    Since the outbreak of COVID-
19 in Wuhan, China in December 2019,
multiple media outlets  around the world
have reported an increase in the rates of
domestic violence (DV). In part, this is the
result of the stringent measures imposed
by governments to reduce the spread of
this  deadly  disease.  Factors  associated
with DV have been exacerbated by the
effects  of  restricted  movements,
increased time spent  at  home,  financial
hardships, increased parental stress, and
rising unemployment linked to COVID-19.
DV  is  defined  in  Kenya’s  Protection
Against  Domestic  Violence  (PADV)  Act
2015, as ‘any form of violence against a
person,  or  threat  of  violence  or  of
imminent danger to that person, by any
other person with whom that person is, or
has been, in a domestic relationship’. DV
can  manifest  socially,  psychologically,
physically,  sexually,  emotionally,  and
financially (Obegi et al, 2017; Mangare et
al, 2018). While DV affects both genders,
more  is  known  about  male-perpetrated
than female-perpetrated DV, and it is not
clear whether what is known about male
violence  also  holds  true  for  female
violence.

Preliminary  and  anecdotal
evidence suggest that domestic violence
against men (DVAM) in Kenya has been
on the increase in recent times (MAWE,
2017).  While  the  true  levels  remain
unknown,  recent  media  reports  show  a
significant  increase  in  DVAM  since  the
onset  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.
Notable  is  the  much-publicized  case  of
police  constables  John  Ogweno  and
Peter  Ndwiga  Njiru  who  were  shot  by
their  colleague,  Caroline  Chemutai,  an
alleged  mutual  intimate  partner  (Daily
Nation, 6 July 2021). However, it is widely
accepted  that  DVAM  is  more  common
than the number of incidents reflected in
the media and other official records. This
is  because  DVAM is  a  hidden  problem
and  abused  men,  for  reasons  of  fear,
embarrassment,  stereotypes  around
masculinity,  cultural  expectations  and
beliefs of male superiority, fear of stigma,
and  ridicule,  never  speak  out  or  seek
help (Gathogo, 2015). However, available
evidence  suggests  that  DVAM  is  a
widespread  problem  (Mwanyuli,  2017;
Kigaya, 2021) that has begun to emerge
from  its  closet  of  secrecy,  especially
during  COVID-19  and  stay-at-home
orders. 

While  DVAM  has  come  to  the
limelight, relatively little is known about it in
Kenya, especially within the context of the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The absence
of information and statistical data on DVAW
in Kenya appears to pervade all sectors and
agencies  (Mutahi,  2017).  Many  data
collection  and  research  efforts,  however,
have  been  disrupted  by  the  containment
measures  imposed to  flatten  the  curve  of
COVID-19 infections. There is, therefore, an
urgent  need for  immediate  and consistent
action. This brief relied on evidence from a
previous  study  and  various  secondary
sources.  Such  evidence  is  key  to  help
develop  effective  strategies  to  prevent
violence and assist victims. 

Study Approach and 
Results

This  brief  draws  upon  two  sources  of
materials.  First,  a  qualitative  study  was
carried out in Mathira East  Sub-County in
Nyeri County of Kenya in March 2017. The
objective  of  the  study  was  to  identify  the
nature,  causes,  consequences,  and
survivors’ responses  to  DVAM.  Qualitative
anthropological  research  techniques
featuring  case  narrative,  in  depth
interviews,  and  key  informant  interviews
were used to gather empirical data from 15
purposively  sampled  men  who  had
experienced  DV  from  their  current  or
previous  intimate  partners.  Second,  this
brief  is  based  on  current  data  from
secondary  sources  including  newspapers,
social  media,  journal  articles,  blogs,  web
sites, government, and other reports.  

The study  established that  DVAM is  a
serious  social  problem  that  occurs  with
impunity behind closed doors and in secret.
The men in our sample reported that they
experienced  episodes  of  physical  abuse
including  being  grabbed or  punished  in  a
manner  that  hurt,  beaten  with  an  object,
kicked,  bitten,  and  forced  into  a  sexual
activity  when  they  did  not  want.  This  is
confirmed  by  the  Kenya  Demographic
Health Survey (KDHS, 2014) which showed
that 44% of men aged 15-49 and 45% of
women had been physically  abused since
age  15  while  12%  of  men  and  20%  of
women had experienced physical  violence
within  the  12  months  prior  to  the  survey.
Most  men  in  our  study  had  also
experienced  psychological  violence  in  the
form of insults, humiliation, limiting contact
with  family  and  friends,  denied  sex,
demanding to know where he was and with
who,  controlling  family  income  and

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Gender, Youth and Vulnerable Groups

COVID-19 and Domestic Violence 
against Men in Kenya: Issues and 
Policy Directions
Tom G. Ondicho and Sharon M. Mwanyuli

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

81

Men are experiencing higher 
levels of controlling 
behaviours from women, and 
higher levels of violence 
perpetrated by women since 
the onset of COVID-19 in 
Kenya. 

Obstacles to disclosure and access
to services are exacerbated by 
the fact that access to and 
supply of support services has 
been disrupted by the 
restrictions imposed to reduce 
the spread of the COVID-19 
pandemic. 

There is an urgent need to 
improve policy responses and 
to make essential services 
accessible and open to all 
abused men in need of support
and help during COVID-19.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

demanding to  have  access  to  his  mobile
phone. This is consistent  with findings by
Maendeleo ya Wanaume (MAWE) in their
study  of  DVAM  in  ten  Kenyan  counties.
Combinations  of  these  factors  may  be
similar to the effects of COVID-19 on men
exposed to DV.  

The research also  found that  most  of
the  factors  associated  with  victimization
were  also  associated  with  perpetration.
These  included  desire  to  dominate,  peer
pressure, anger and frustration, alcoholism
and drug use, suspicion of marital infidelity,
unemployment  and  poverty,  desire  to
control use of mobile phone and resources,
low  education  levels,  financial  hardships,
and  poor  mental  health.  Many  of  these
factors  have  been  exacerbated  by  the
COVID-19-induced  restrictions  and
increased  men’s  vulnerability  to  DV.
Emerging evidence suggest that restricted
mobility;  excessive  alcohol  and drug use;
confinement of victims and their abusers in
the home; men’s inability to provide for their
families;  rising  unemployment;  loss  of
income; mental stress; family conflicts and
associated  stress  and,  changes  in  the
social and economic circumstances during
the  COVID-19  may  have  sparked  an
increase of DVAM in Kenya. 

The study showed that DV abused men
suffered  physical  consequences  ranging
from  minor  to  severe  injuries,  and  even
death.  In  addition to physical  injuries,  the
study  revealed  that  the  victimized  men
experienced  serious  psycho-social
problems, including high levels of  anxiety,
depression,  and  stress  from  ever-present
threat of attack. Abused men working from
home reported that DV had disrupted their
work,  prevented  them  from  seeking
employment,  caused  them  to  resign  and
abandon  their  career  and  promotional
opportunities  during  COVID-19.  These
consequences  extend  to  family  members
and neighbours who attempt to intervene.
Children and other family members run the
risk of being injured or killed by the abuser
if they become involved either by chance or
try  to  protect  their  father.  Beyond  the
personal costs, DVAM can in the long-run
lead to stigmatization of the individual and
his  family,  social  isolation,  and temporary
economic  and  psychological  dependence
on  others  or  support  groups,  and  huge
financial costs in terms of money spent on
police  and  court  services,  health  and
welfare  services  including  housing  and
food.  These  impacts  are  consistent  with
those  suffered  by  violence  against  men
during  other  crises  including  COVID-19
now. 

The research revealed that the men in
our  sample  did  not  seek  any  form  of
external intervention including legal redress
for the violence experienced. However, it is
likely that because people are confined at
home  during  COVID-19  crisis,  family
members are likely to witness the violence,
and  therefore  may  compel  the  victimized
men  to  speak  out  and  or  seek  help.
However, the situation may be complicated
by the fact that COVID-19 has significantly
impacted the provision of essential health,
justice,  policing  and  social  services  for
victims of DV. As service providers become

overburdened  and  prioritise  COVID-19
cases,  urgent  support,  e.g.,  clinical
management  of  injuries,  psycho-social
counselling  for  survivors  have  been
disrupted  and may  not  be  available  for
the  survivors  of  DV.  Police  and  justice
sectors  are  overwhelmed  and  shifted
priorities  towards  enforcing  social
distancing,  curfew,  and  responding  to
emergencies  and  crime  that  may
increase  because  of  the  social  and
economic  consequences  of  the
pandemic.   

Policy 
Recommendations
There are no policies in Kenya now that
directly  address  domestic  violence
against  men.  Additionally,  there  are
limited social, legal, advocacy, or shelter
services  dedicated  specifically  to
victimized  men  especially  during  the
current  COVID-19  pandemic.  There  is
also  an  urgent  need  not  only  to  raise
awareness on domestic violence against
men,  but  also  to  develop  strategies  for
outreach  and  support  of  men  who  are
vulnerable  during  the  COVID-19  crisis.
Further,  the  research  highlights  several
important policy directions.

Medium-Term
 Government  needs  to  identify  the

specific needs of abused men with a
view of providing appropriate support
services and initiate programmes and
policies  to  respond  to  these  needs
using  technology-based  interventions
including  SMS,  social  media,  and
online tools  and networks to support
the  survivors  especially  during  the
time of COVID-19.  

 Establish,  where  possible,  helplines,
counselling  services,  shelters  and
crisis  centres  operated  by  the  state
and  NGOs  and  keep  them  open
during  the  COVID-19  crisis  while
adhering  to  the  necessary  safety
precautions. 

 Ensure  that  victimized  men  have
access to essential response services
—  such  as  case  management,
temporary  shelter,  urgent  medical
care,  and  other  forms  of  support  to
meet their specific and unique needs.

 Establish  protection  programmes  not
only  focused  on  the  specific  and
unique needs and experiences of men
but  also  ensure  that  men  with
meaningful opportunities to participate
in  leadership  and  making  decisions
regarding  priority  areas  of
intervention,  in  planning and delivery
of support services, and in all areas of
programme/policy  design  and
implementation,  to  ensure  that
prevention,  response,  and
coordination  approaches  are  carried
out  in  a  way that  is  context-specific,
sustainable,  and  adapted  to  the
gendered dimensions  of  the  COVID-
19 pandemic.

 Government needs to enact policies and
programmes not only to raise the level of
awareness  about  the  detrimental
impacts  of  domestic  violence  against
men but also to transform attitudes and
behaviour  which  inhibit  victimised  men
from speaking out, reporting, or seeking
help. 

 Government needs to promote targeted
educational  activities  to  increase
people’s  ability  to  identify  all  forms  of
domestic  violence,  support  those
experiencing violence, and boost referral
networks within the community through
social media and other online channels. 

Long-Term
 Government  should  prioritise  and

officially  recognise  domestic  violence
services as an essential  and lifesaving
component  of  the  humanitarian
response  to  COVID-19,  including
ensuring that necessary services remain
open,  and  that  adequate  funding  is
provided  to  enable  targeted,  safe,
appropriate,  and  high-quality
interventions to take place. 

 Government  should  ensure  that
domestic violence prevention, response
and risk mitigation activities are included
as a specific objective in all current and
future  funding  appeals  and  response
plans.

 In  recognition  of  the  gendered
dimensions  of  COVID-19,  all
programming  should  be  based  on  the
findings of a Rapid Gender Analysis that
includes  data  disaggregated  by  sex,
age, and disability, to better understand
the  differential  experiences  of  affected
individuals  and  communities,  and  to
guide  gender-informed  action  in  the
short, medium, and long-term. 

 Government  needs  to  strengthen
gender-based  violence  policy  and
improve  institutional  capacity  and
responsiveness.  Closer  collaboration
between  government  agencies,  NGOs,
and  other  actors  will  help  to  reflect
intersections. 

 Service  providers  from  health,
psychosocial support, legal and security
sectors need to be supported to better
understand  how  gender  influences
men’s experiences of domestic violence,
and review programs to reflect  specific
needs and priorities of abused men. 

 Create  further  synergies  between
violence  against  men  and  violence
against women programming and policy
efforts to ensure that the unique needs
and  experiences  of  both  genders  are
appropriately addressed. 

 Given the limited evidence that exists—
both in terms of the scale and nature of
DVAM  there  is  a  need  to  develop
innovative  approaches  for  research
within  in  the  context  of  COVID-19  to
better  understand  the  dimensions  of
violence  against  men  in  domestic
settings. 

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

82



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Acknowledgement
This  policy  brief  is  an  offshoot  of  a

previous  study  by  Sharon  Mwanyuli,
experiences of battered men seeking legal
redress in Mathira East Sub-County which
was research Master of Arts in Gender and
Development  Studies  project,  the
University of Nairobi. 

References
Gathogo,  J.  (2015).  Men  battering  as

the  new  form  of  domestic  violence.  A
pastoral care perspective from the Kenyan
context.  HTS Theological  Studies, (71)  3:
2792-2801.

Karimi,  E.  (2018)  Characterizing
domestic  violence  against  men:  insights
from Kirinyaga Central  ward.  Unpublished
MA project, University of Nairobi. 

Kenya  National  Bureau  of  Statistics.
(2014).  Kenya  demographic  and  health

survey  2014.  http://statistics.knbs.or.ke/
nada/index.php/catalog/74/study-
description

Kigaya,  2021  Domestic  violence
against men in Kenya. Unpublished PhD
thesis, MSN, University of Maryland.

Maendeleo  ya  Wanaume  (Mawe,
2017)  State  of  the  Nation  Study  on
Violence against Men and Boys [VAMB]
Conducted  in  10  Counties  in  Kenya.
Nairobi” Abroad Technology

Mongare,  J.K,  Obonyo,  J  and
Parsitau,  D.  (2018).  Impact  of  gender-
based  violence  towards  men  in  Kenya.
The case of men in Kimbaa in Kiambaa
sub-county, Kiambu. International Journal
of  Current  Aspects  of  Public  Policy
Administration  and  Development,  2(1)
18-25.

Mutahi,  N.  (2017).  A  study  of  the
factors contributing to domestic violence
against  male partners in Kenya: a case
study of rural Nyeri county, Central Kenya

Region. Unpublished MA project, University
of Nairobi.

Mwanyuli,  S.  (2017)  Experiences  of
battered  men  seeking  legal  redress  in
Mathira  east  sub-county.  Unpublished  MA
project, University of Nairobi.

Obegi,  M.M.,  Mwangi,  S.  W.  and
Applos, F. M. (2017) Cases and incidences
of violence against men in township ward of
Nyamira  County,  Kenya. International
Academic  Journal  of  Law  and
Society1(1):106-125.  International  Environ-
mental Agreements, 20, 141–159

Authors
Tom G. Ondicho
tondicho@uonbi.ac.ke
Department of Anthropology, Gender and 
African Studies, University of Nairobi, P. O 
Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya
Sharon M. Mwanyuli
The Judiciary of Kenya

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

83


