
Landscape Restoration in Kenya
Addressing gender equality

Photo credit: Patrick Shepherd/CIFOR



Unlocking the potential of forest landscape restoration (FLR) to achieve 

both social and environmental outcomes rests critically on the support, 

contributions and cooperation of a wide range of stakeholders at all levels, 

including women and men. In Kenya, the government has committed to 

restoring 5.1 million hectares of land by 2030. At the same time, Kenya’s 

commitment to promoting gender equality and women’s empowerment is 

enshrined in its Constitution, various national laws and policies as well as 

international conventions, including the Sustainable Development Goal 

framework. The purpose of this study was to provide empirically grounded 

lessons on opportunities and challenges for addressing gender in landscape 

restoration in Kenya, as well as to share recommendations for making sure 

Kenya’s ambitious restoration efforts do not repeat the mistakes of past 

gender-blind restoration initiatives, but make sure both women and men are 

able to enjoy the opportunities and benefits generated through landscape 

restoration. 

Our study departs from a theoretical framework on gender and restoration 

prepared by the CGIAR research program on Forests, Trees and Agroforestry 

(Sijapati Basnett et al 2017), that broadly outlines three types of decisions 

central gender-equitable and socially inclusive engagement in FLR, these are: 

land use and control; FLR priorities and approaches; and the distribution of 

costs and benefits (see Figure 1.).

To guide our analysis, the following research questions were developed:

1) How and to what extent are women and men participating in and 

benefiting from FLR initiatives?

2) How do different types of FLR initiatives across different landscapes 

(forests, rangelands, croplands) impact women and men’s rights and 

wellbeing?

3) What are some of the key mechanisms and underlying factors causing 

differentiated and/or unequal participation, benefits and impacts 

between and among women and men?

Our study methodology was influenced by IUCN’s gender-responsive 

restoration guidelines (IUCN 2017) as well as CIFOR’s Global Comparative 

Study on REDD+ (e.g. Larson et al 2018). As part of the study, we did the 

following: 1) conducted a literature review; 2) compiled and analyzed policies 

and legislation relevant for FLR initiatives to understand how and to what extent 

gender equality is addressed, and; 3) collected and analyzed qualitative, sex-

disaggregated data on participation, costs and benefits and well-being impacts 

in 4 restoration sites. The sites were chosen in collaboration with Kenya Forest 

Service (KFS), making sure each priority restoration landscape identified by the 

Technical Working Group on Forest Landscape Restoration (forest, rangeland, 

cropland) was represented. In each site, we conducted key informant interviews 

with a project staff and a community leader as well as one male and one female 

focus group discussion. The following sites were chosen for the study:

Some key findings

Our findings demonstrate that there are clear gender differences and inequalities 

with respect to control over land and productive resources, decision-making 

power, resource use and farm/off-farm labor. While landowners possessed 

formal title deeds to varying extents, men were reported to make up a significant 

majority of landowners in each of the four sites. Our findings also point to some 

discrepancies between formal legislation and customary practice. In Naibunga, 

for instance, women lost their rights to inherit ancestral land upon marriage, while 

in Lari and Mwala, women and girls could only inherit family land in instances 

where there were no boys or men in the family. In Mwala, parents were hesitant 

towards transferring land titles to youth, worrying that land might be lost if used as 

collateral for loans they were unable to repay. This has implications for restoration, 

as insecure tenure rights can limit the perceived security of access to future 

benefits and hence dis-incentivize e.g. tree planting (see e.g. Quisumbing and 

Kumar 2014 for Ethiopia). 

In all agricultural sites, women reported men as the key decision-makers 

on private farms, despite women being perceived as equally (Nyandarua) 

or significantly more (Mwala, Lari) engaged in farming labor than men in all 

farming sites. We also found that men 

clearly outnumbered women in local 

decision-making bodies in Naibunga 

and Lari. In both sites, male dominance 

in decision-making was attributed 

by women and men respondents to 

cultural factors. In Mwala, however, 

women’s active participation in project 

meetings was attributed both to a 

general male disinterest in agriculture as 

well as women’s conscious mobilization 

efforts through their self-help groups. In 

Nyandarua, women’s relatively strong 

participation in the Community Forest 

Association (CFA) was attributed 

to both the implementation of the 

constitutional 1/3 gender balance in 

all local decision-making bodies as 

well as the construction of the CFA 

management committee around 

forest user groups (1 representative 

per user group). As women in the 

area were active in a greater number 

of forest uses, they were able to have 

more female representatives in the 

management committee. 

Figure 1: Framework for gender-responsive restoration (Sijapati Basnett et al 2017, 9)

The study also found that across all sites, women were participating in and 

contributing more labor to restoration activities than their male counterparts. 

This can be attributed to some extent by explicit efforts to involve women in 

project activities. For instance, in Naibunga, women and poor community 

members were prioritized for grant-funded casual restoration tasks (e.g. 

removing invasive species or grass reseeding), in order to dis-incentivize 

them from continuing their engagement in charcoal burning – a livelihood lost 

as trees became protected. In Nyandarua, women and landless community 

members were prioritized in PELIS plot allocation, while a women’s self-

help group was specifically selected as an implementing partner in Mwala. 

At the same time, there was often also a disinterest among men towards 

participating in many project activities, including planting or weeding, as they 

were seen as more suitable for women. 

Despite reported gender inequalities in landownership, decision-making 

and labor, it is critical to note that in each of the sites, women reported 

increased incomes due to their participation in restoration initiatives. 

However, in Naibunga, the share of income generated from restoration vis-

à-vis beadworks (the main income source for most women) was limited. 

Respondents in both PELIS sites noted that female beneficiaries were earning 

and retaining more income than previously, both due to crop sales as well as 

reduced expenditure on food. In Mwala, increased incomes were attributed 

to increased crop yields and more effective marketing. A particularly critical 

factor was women’s collaboration in the self-help group (SHG). In the absence 

of male labor, women used the self-help group to pool labor, allowing them 

to overcome some of the initial labor requirements associated with certain 

farming practices. As a group, they were also able to access loans and 

aggregate their produce to receive better prices on the market.  At the same 

time, however, women in Lari noted that while they had planted trees on 

the private farms, harvesting (for timber) was reserved for the husband. Male 

control over timber mirrors earlier findings from Kenya and East Africa (e.g. 

KWAP 1996, Tyndall and Franzel 1998). 

Overall, women and men in all sites were positive about the environmental 

and livelihood impacts of the restoration initiatives. Direct economic benefits 

emerged as the most important factor for both male and female respondents, 

and should indeed be considered a critical aspect for both enhancing 

wellbeing and incentivizing participation in restoration activities. However, 

improved soils, reduced human-wildlife conflict and increased availability 

of firewood and other non-timber forest products, were also reported as 

important by participants. Labor-saving technologies and shorter distances 

to water and firewood were emphasized particularly by female groups. 

In all sites, women’s involvement in decision-making was reported to have 

increased over the past decades. In all sites except Mwala – where education 

and awareness-raising were emphasized as the most important causal factors 

– the women’s FGDs attributed their increased decision-making power to 

their ability to earn independent incomes. It is indeed critical to note that in all 

sites, women’s participation in restoration initiatives generated independent 

income to women. While the extent to which women controlled this income 

varied between households, women in all sites reported some influence 

over the income they received through participating in various restoration 

activities. Importantly, we found that women tended to report more influence 

over income accessed directly on individual basis or through women’s 

groups. In Lari and Naibunga, where some benefits were distributed through 

mixed-gender groups, men tended to control access to benefits. In Lari and 

Nyandarua, women felt that earning income through PELIS had allowed them 

more leverage in decisions over household expenditures, while in Naibunga 

women had become more involved in community decision-making. The 

relationship between women’s abilities to earn independent incomes and 

their enhanced autonomy and bargaining power is supported by research in 

various value chains and contexts (Barrientos 2001, Rubin and Manfre 2014)

In terms of income expenditure, all respondents emphasized spending income 

on food and school fees. For the former, all sites except Naibunga reported an 

increase of available food and less food insecurity due to increased agricultural 

production. Food security was attributed to enhanced production and incomes, 

as well as better tree cover (perceived to have reduced frost in Nyandarua). 

Particularly women (and some men) noted an overall increase in the availability 

of firewood due to tree planting and conservation, reporting spending less time 

on firewood collection. However, in Lari and Nyandarua, firewood availability 

was temporarily negatively impacted due to the ongoing logging ban, affecting 

predominantly women who were responsible for firewood collection. In terms of 

education, all sites reported an increase over the past decades in school enrollment 

overall, and girls’ enrollment in particular, which can in turn help enhance gender 

equality over time. For instance, in Naibunga, where women complained men 

only focused on educating the boy child, women used their independent income 

to specifically fund girls’ education. However, income generated from restoration 

initiatives was also invested in boosting or diversifying livelihood activities. Women 

in Mwala reported purchasing agricultural inputs directly from agro dealers, thus 

reducing their dependence on government provision. Interestingly, investments in 

buying additional land were reported mainly by men, while women - especially in 

PELIS sites - opted for investing in off-farm businesses.

Recommendations 

We find that restoration initiatives impact women and men’s rights and 

wellbeing as well as relations between men and women in different ways. 

It is therefore critical that all restoration initiatives seek the consent of both 

men and women when implementing activities on their lands. Similarly, 

initiatives need to solicit the inputs from both women and men in order to 

ensure the restoration initiatives are aligned with community members’ 

development priorities and enhance their wellbeing. 

Location Landscape Implementing agency Approach and activities

Naibunga Conservancy, Laikipia county Rangeland Community and Northern 
Rangelands Trust

Improved livestock management; natural 
regeneration; grass reseeding and removal of 
invasive species

Mwala, Machakos county Cropland WorldVision Australia (part of 
Drylands Development Program)

Promotion of various improved varieties and 
farming practices, incl. agroforestry; value chain 
development

Geta forest, Nyandarua county Forest Kenya Forest Service (KFS) Plantation Establishment and Livelihood 
Improvement Scheme (PELIS): communities 
allowed to farm on public land in exchange for 
planting trees

Kikuyu escarpment forest, Lari county Forest KFS and Kijabe Environment 
Volunteers (KENVO)

PELIS; forest conservation and small-scale 
livelihood projects



Due to gender inequalities in control over resources as well as gendered 

division of labor, costs and benefits can differ significantly between 

different groups of women and men, including youth. The distribution 

of costs and benefits can therefore not be assumed uniform within 

communities nor households. Importantly, the distribution of costs and 

benefits depends on a number of factors, including the socioeconomic 

and cultural context, the planned restoration option as well as 

programmatic approaches. It is critical that each planned restoration 

initiative conducts a context-specific gender analysis, which is informed 

by sex-disaggregated, intra-household level data. This analysis should 

provide baseline information on a broad range of aspects, including: 

women and men’s land and resource rights, access and use; decision-

making power on household and community level, and; division of productive 

and reproductive labor, including income-generating activities. 

Importantly, we find that restoration initiatives can impact power 

relations between men and women in multiple ways and directions. 

Therefore, this analysis needs to address formal and informal norms 

and institutions that contribute to maintaining inequalities (e.g. 

customary inheritance rights, decision-making bodies, harvesting 

rights etc.). It should also aim to identify and support processes and 

spaces where such inequalities are being challenged.

Ensuring restoration activities generate financial benefits to 

community members is critical for incentivizing continued 

participation. As financial benefits from certain restoration options 

can take a long time to materialize, providing alternative livelihood 

options or income sources is critical for allowing community members 

to absorb financial and/or labor costs incurred by restoration, as well as 

incentivizing long-term participation. In order to ensure financial benefits 

reach women, our findings suggest exploring opportunities to 

distribute benefits individually or through women’s groups. When 

benefits are distributed through groups, inclusivity and transparency 

should be enforced. Further, restoration initiative should adopt 

innovative approaches to foster joint decision-making between 

women and men.

Our findings indicate that young men and women in some areas also lack 

harvesting rights to trees. Insofar as underlying inequalities regarding land 

and property rights remain unchanged, it is important that restoration 

initiatives (particularly on croplands) do not focus solely on fast-

growing timber, but explore options that can generate a mix of 

short- and long-term benefits accessible to both women and 

men (e.g. agroforestry options with timber, fuelwood and fruit species). 

Further, various means – including awareness-raising campaigns 

and affirmative action in land titling – could be considered by the 

Government for addressing gender inequalities in land ownership, in order 

to implement constitutional promises to eliminate gender discrimination in 

relation to property. Provisions for gender equality and equal treatment of 

women and men inscribed in the Constitution as well as the Land Act 

(2012) and Community Land Act (2016) should be leveraged for enhancing 

women’s land rights and participation in decision-making on customary lands. 

To overcome gender inequalities in decision-making, implementing 

agencies can leverage the Constitutional mandate to enforce affirmative 

action. We also recommend engaging women’s groups and other forms of 

women’s local organizations in the design and implementation of initiatives. 

In addition, financial and labor constraints can limit uptake of restoration 

practices. Women may often face additional constraints, such as limited 

decision-making power and limited access to credit. Our findings suggest 

that women’s self-help groups can allow women to pool labor, better 

access credit and develop joint marketing strategies for overcoming 

potential financial and labor hurdles associated with restoration. 

NGOs, financial institutions and extension workers can play critical 

roles in ensuring financial services are made available to both women and 

men, conducting market analyses and providing trainings.

Based on a gender analysis, restoration initiatives should set specific 

objectives and time-bound targets relating to various aspects of gender 

equality, including access and control over land and other resources; 

decision-making; labor and time-use, and; income. Each objective and 

target should have both process- and progress-oriented indicators and 

be monitored systematically to assess progress and allow for adaptive 

learning. We recommend integrating these targets and indicators into a 

national monitoring framework, which can be disseminated to implementing 

agencies. To enhance coherence between various national commitments, 

we recommend these targets and indicators be influenced by those 

developed for the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as national 

legislation, policies and political ambitions aimed at strengthening gender-

equitable land and property rights, tenure security, political participation etc. 

However, the general indicators should also be adapted to the local context 

in collaboration with women and men in affected communities.

References
Barrientos, S. 2001. Gender, flexibility and global value chains. IDS bulletin, 32(3), 83-93.

[IUCN] International Union for Conservation of Nature. 2017. Gender-responsive Restoration Guidelines: A Closer Look at 

Gender in the Restoration Opportunities Assessment Methodology. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.

KWAP 1996. A survey on gender participation in agroforestry activities in Uasin Gishu District. Kenya Wood Fuel and 

Agroforestry Project. Project Report.  

Larson, A. M., Solis, D., Duchelle, A. E., Atmadja, S., Resosudarmo, I. A. P., Dokken, T., & Komalasari, M. (2018). Gender 

lessons for climate initiatives: A comparative study of REDD+ impacts on subjective wellbeing. World 

Development, 108, 86-102.

Quisumbing AR and Kumar N. 2014. Climate-smart agricultural practices in rural Ethiopia. The gender- differentiated 

impact of land rights knowledge. Climate Change, Collective Action, & Women’s Assets. Washington, DC: 

International Food Policy Research Institute.

Rubin, D. and Manfre, C. 2014. Promoting gender-equitable agricultural value chains: Issues, Opportunities, and Next 

Steps. In: Gender in agriculture (pp. 287-313). Springer, Dordrecht.

Sijapati Basnett, B., Elias, M., Ihalainen, M., Paez-Valencia, A. M. (2017): Gender matters in Forest Landscape Restoration. 

A framework for design and evaluation. CIFOR, Indonesia. 

Tyndall, B. and Franzel S. 1998. Socio-economics of grevillea in the coffee land use system of central Kenya. In: 

Wamuongo, J.W., Sitawa, J.K., Mugah, J.O. and Ayemba, J.A. (eds,). From research to dissemination: 

agroforestry into the next millenium: Proceedings of the National Agroforestry Research Project Symposium.

For more information, please, contact: 

Mr. Alfred N. Gichu, 
Head: Climate Change Response Program,
Kenya Forest Service,
National REDD+ Coordinator & Focal Point,
Ministry of Environment & Forestry ,
P.O. Box 30126-00100
NAIROBI, Kenya.
Tel: +254- 020-2219622,
Mobile: +254-7227874033,

Email: alfredgichu@yahoo.com; alfredgichu@kenyaforestservice.org

mailto:alfredgichu%40yahoo.com?subject=

