
AfricAn  
StAndArdS And 
GuidelineS for 
QuAlity ASSurAnce  
in HiGHer educAtion 
(ASG-QA)

This initiative is implemented on behalf of the European 
and African Union Commissions by:



2

This document is available under license: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license   
(Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International) 
 
African Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Higher Education 
 (ASG-QA)  
HAQAA Initiative  
http://hdl.handle.net/2445/126939

This document has been prepared for the African Union Commission and European 
Union Commission however it reflects the views only of the authors, and the 
 Commissions cannot be held responsible for any use which may be made of the 
information contained therein. 

http://hdl.handle.net/2445/126939


3



4

tAble of contentS 
Foreword ............... ............................................................................................6
Introduction ...... ...................................... ..........................................................8
 Background ............ ........................................................................................... 8
 Purpose ............. .............................................................................................. 10
 Approach Used in Framing the Standards and Guidelines .............................. 10
 Scope ................... .............................................................................................11

Part A:  
Standards and Guidelines for Internal Quality Assurance ............................13 
 Introduction  .................................................................................................. 13
 Standard 1. Vision, Mission and Strategic Objectives  .................................... 13
 Standard 2. Governance and Management ..................................................... 14
 Standard 3. Human Resources ........................................................................ 15
 Standard 4. Financial Resource Management  .................................................16
 Standard 5. Infrastructure and Facilities  ........................................................16
 Standard 6. Student Recruitment, Admission, 
 Certification and Support Services ................................................................. 18
 Standard 7. Design, Approval, Monitoring and Evaluation 
 of Study Programmes  ......................................................................................19
 Standard 8. Teaching, Learning and Assessment ........................................... 21
 Standard 9. Research and Innovation  ............................................................ 23
 Standard 10. Community Engagement  .......................................................... 24
 Standard 11. Information Management System .............................................. 24
 Standard 12. Public Communication .............................................................. 25
 Standard 13. Collaboration, Staff and Student Mobility  ................................ 26

Part B: 
Standards and Guidelines for External Quality Assurance ...........................27
 Introduction  .................................................................................................. 27
 Standard 1. Objectives of External Quality Assurance and 
 Consideration for Internal Quality Assurance  ............................................... 27
 Standard 2. Designing External Quality Assurance 
 Mechanisms Fit for Purpose............................................................................ 28
 Standard 3. Implementation Processes of External Quality Assurance .......... 28
 Standard 4. Independence of Evaluation ........................................................ 29
 Standard 5. Decision and Reporting of External 
 Quality Assurance Outcomes .......................................................................... 30
 Standard 6. Periodic Review of Institutions and Programmes ....................... 30
 Standard 7. Complaints and Appeals .............................................................. 31



5

Part C: 
Internal Quality Assurance for Quality Assurance Agencies ........................32
 Introduction  .................................................................................................. 32
 Standard 1. Legal Status ................................................................................. 32
 Standard 2. Vision and Mission Statement   ................................................... 33
 Standard 3. Governance and Management   ................................................... 33
 Standard 4. Independence of QAA .................................................................. 34
 Standard 5. Policies, Processes and Activities  ............................................... 34
 Standard 6. Internal Quality Assurance   ........................................................ 35
 Standard 7. Financial and Human Resources .................................................. 36
 Standard 8. Benchmarking, Networking and Collaboration ........................... 36
 Standard 9. Periodic Review of QAAs ............................................................. 37

Annex 1 – Drafting Process of the ASG-QA ...................................................38
Annex 2 - Key terms  .......................................................................................41
Annex 3 - Glossary  .........................................................................................42



6

foreword
Harmonised quality higher education systems are imperative for Africa to realise the 
vision of an integrated, prosperous and peaceful continent. The African Union (AU) 
has, at the highest level, called for the harmonisation and strengthening of the qual-
ity of higher education in Africa to make it both locally relevant and globally com-
petitive. This is in line with the AU’s Agenda 2063: “The Africa We Want”, and is an 
important instrument for facilitating the recently signed AU Continental Free Trade 
Area. These efforts are a culmination of Africa’s long time desire for harmonised 
higher education systems that can facilitate the mobility of trained people with 
accredited qualifications. Diverse systems of higher education have resulted in the 
lack of mutual recognition of university degrees, constraining academic integration 
and the mobility of students across the African continent. Collective endorsement 
of harmonisation and mutual recognition presupposes increased attention to quality 
and quality assurance in higher education. The rapid growth in the number of stu-
dents and higher education institutions (HEIs), and the increased focus on employ-
ability, have made quality and quality assurance central topics. If Africa’s investment 
in the education of its youth is to reap demographic dividends, quality and quality 
assurance in higher education and training are essential.

The AU’s vision of building an integrated Africa requires harmonised education, 
underpinned by  intra-Africa mobility and skills portability. The Continental Educa-
tion Strategy for Africa (CESA) recognises that ‘Harmonised education and training 
systems are essential for the realisation of intra-Africa mobility and academic inte-
gration through regional cooperation’. Heads of State and Government of the African 
Union have further institutionalised their appreciation of the role of higher education 
in achieving the AU vision, by taking a Decision calling for mechanisms for harmo-
nisation and quality assurance to ensure comparable higher education in Africa, and 
for the establishment of a continental Accreditation and Quality Agency. This is 
reflected in the First Ten-Year Implementation Plan of Agenda 2063 as a means to 
develop and monitor educational quality standards across the continent. 

The African Union Commission (AUC) works with African higher education institu-
tions in promoting harmonisation and quality assurance, supported by partnership 
from the European Union (EU) and EU institutions. The Association of African Uni-
versities (AAU) has been identified as the AU’s lead implementing agency in higher 
education in Africa.  



7

Harmonisation seeks a shared view on quality criteria and standards, and an equiva-
lent way of assessing the quality.  It is crucial to harmonise the standards and criteria 
so that all universities will be regulated according to comparable standards. Indeed, 
harmonisation does not mean that every institution or each country is forced into a 
uniform system. It rather means that the basic framework for quality assessment is 
equivalent. A key milestone for fostering harmony within the diverse African higher 
education system is the establishment of a continental quality assurance framework. 
The AUC therefore initiated development of the Pan-African Quality Assurance and 
Accreditation Framework (PAQAF) to provide a continental platform for enhancing 
the provision of higher education quality, and promoting compatible 
methodologies.

One of the necessary instruments for the appropriate functioning of PAQAF is the 
development of the African Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Higher 
Education (ASG-QA). Proper implementation of the ASG-QA can contribute to the 
provision of quality higher education, and ensure that the qualifications obtained 
by students and their experience of higher education remain consonant with pro-
gramme requirements, institutional vision and mission, and the objectives of higher 
education.  In order to optimally achieve this, a fundamental prerequisite is that 
HEIs inculcate a culture of evidence-based quality in all their activities. The AUC 
believes that the ASG-QA provides an overarching framework for quality assurance 
and that its implementation will be supported by the African Quality Rating Mecha-
nism (AQRM).
 
The African Union Commission appreciates the work that went into development of 
the ASG-QA, in the context of the ‘Harmonisation of African Higher Education Qual-
ity Assurance and Accreditation Initiative’ (HAQAA) by a Technical Working Group 
of experts from five African regions.  The ASG-QA has been subjected to a series of 
consultations of major African higher education agencies and experts, as well as 
Member States quality assurance bodies, student organisations and other key stake-
holders. I therefore believe that it reflects a valid African perspective, while not 
ignoring international good practices. Thank you to the EU and partner agencies 
that provided financial and technical support.

I call on Member States to promote the use of this instrument towards an African 
quality higher education space, contributing to the collective African vision.

H.E. Prof. Sarah Anyang Agbor
Commissioner for Human Resources, Science and Technology
African Union Commission



8

introduction
Background
Following several decades of post-independence and post-liberation development on 
the African continent, much progress has been made on a number of fronts in devel-
oping societies; establishing stable governments, and instituting systems of higher 
education and economic production, amongst others. 

Development has been steady in many countries, resulting in a better standard of living 
for their citizens. It is clear, however, that the colonial, post-colonial and other exploita-
tive legacies have left deep imprints on developmental challenges, which in most 
instances in more than half a century of self-determination, have hindered African 
countries from achieving full development, including on the higher education front. This 
has been exacerbated by instances of internal and regional conflicts, poor governance, 
corruption, and injudicious use and management of available resources. In most cases, 
the scale of challenges related to development have seemed overwhelming, and dispro-
portionate to the amount of resources available to address them adequately and 
sustainably. 

The objective of higher education in Africa in the 21st Century is to increase access 
and ensure quality education provision, ensuring that higher education is responsive 
to Africa’s priorities and relevant to the labour market. This includes inculcating 
entrepreneurial and innovative mind frames and African values in order to contribute 
to social economic development, job creation and employability. Currently, however, 
too many graduates do not meet the needs of employers. Higher education develop-
ment should take place in the context of African continental, regional and national 
needs, and be based on African epistemologies and content.  
 
It is unquestionable that education plays a fundamental role in the development of 
nations.  While much international focus on educational development over several 
decades has been on basic education, it is now realised and accepted that investment 
in higher education yields significant benefits for nations. Developing economies 
require high level and skilled human capacity to identify and leverage opportunities 
flowing from exploitation of natural and social resources and intellectual capital, 
globalisation and macroeconomic changes. Equally, to take advantage of the devel-
opments in technology and contribute to innovations, higher level research knowl-
edge is critical, which mostly derives from higher education. From a developmental 



9

perspective, in order to build research and innovation ecosystems, promote and 
preserve democratisation and leadership and strengthen collaborative cultures, 
higher education needs to yield diverse and complex capabilities. 

In order to liberate its full potential and work cooperatively in the continental inter-
ests, and to realise its aspirations, Africa has to: (1) unleash its potential to become 
self-reliant in its higher education provision, by for example, promoting leadership 
and  good governance in higher education institutions; and (2) enhance investment 
in higher education while assuring inclusion, greater equity and opportunity for all 
to access higher education. However, adequate financial resources remain the core 
challenge of higher education across the continent. Governments should do their 
utmost to increase funds for the growing demands of African higher education. 
Funding should be secured in the long-term in order to develop stable and resourced 
higher education systems throughout the whole continent. 

Strengthening local resourcing and leadership in multi-lateral partnerships where 
joint or cooperative ventures focus more on local priorities and capacities will pro-
mote relevance and quality assurance. The African Union drive for enhancing intra-
African collaboration, academic, mobility, and pooling of resources and capacities 
in higher education will help to enhance efficiencies and promote quality through 
constructive peer pressure. Higher education institutions are vitally important vehi-
cles to achieve these African social economic aspirations. In these developments, 
students are the key stakeholders whose voice should be at the core of all 
discussions. 

The role of quality assurance is, therefore, crucial in supporting African higher edu-
cation systems and institutions in responding to challenges related to legal frame-
works, governance, funding, qualifications of teaching staff, and research capacity. 
To address some of these challenges and ensure quality, there is need for collabora-
tion and sharing of resources between institutions both locally and internationally. 
There is also a need for greater international cooperation which enhances mobility 
of both staff and students. Funding should be secured also for the development of a 
comprehensive quality assurance environment in both higher education institutions 
(HEI) and quality assurance agencies.



10

PurPose 
The ASG-QA will support HEIs and quality assurance agencies (QAAs) in Africa in imple-
menting good quality assurance (QA) practices by guiding them in the application of 
standards and guidelines in higher education, helping them to develop adequate internal 
QA mechanisms that fit international best practices and assisting them in assessing 
their own quality through self-assessment. 

The specific purpose of the ASG-QA is, therefore, to support HEIs and QAAs in 
Member States in Africa to: (a) have a common framework and understanding of QA 
systems  for teaching and learning among all stakeholders at continental, regional 
and national level; (b) develop mutual trust, thus facilitating recognition and mobil-
ity of students and human resources within and across national borders of the con-
tinent; (c) ensure quality improvement/enhancement in higher education on the 
continent through self-assessment, external peer review and continuous monitoring 
and evaluation; (d) promote transparency and accountability by providing appropri-
ate information on QA to the public; (e) support HEIs to develop a sustainable quality 
culture; (f) promote international competitiveness of Africa’s higher education sys-
tem; and (g) support the production of relevant teaching and learning resources as 
well as student assessment instruments.

As the ASG-QA and the African Quality Rating Mechanism (AQRM)1 are comple-
mentary and mutually supportive; the ASG-QA will operate alongside the AQRM 
and  will complement the AQRM in supporting African higher education institutions 
to develop a sustainable quality culture.

The ASG-QA are a set of standards and guidelines for internal and external QA in 
higher education. These standards are not meant to be prescriptive but they rather 
provide a mechanism for quality attainment in African HEIs and QAAs.  They are 
developed to eventually add value to institutions and QAAs by providing a unified 
framework applicable to all QA processes, allowing an enhancement-led approach 
for the escalation of institutional and educational quality.  

National QAAs should function as the national contacts for the ASG-QA. The ASG-
QA can serve as the guiding framework in facilitating the establishment of QAAs in 
countries where they do not yet exist. 

aPProach used in Framing the standards and guidelines
The ASG-QA are stated as common minimum standards or requirements that must 
be complied with. However, individual HEIs and QAAs can add additional standards 
that will reflect their own traditions and contexts. The guidelines describe how the 

1  The African Quality Rating Mechanism (AQRM) has been developed as a tool to underpin an African system that 
will ensure that the performance of higher education institutions can be compared against a set of common criteria 
and to facilitate a culture of continuous quality improvement through self-evaluation exercises and external vali-
dation. The AQRM is instrumental to help institutions assess themselves for continuous improvement by fostering 
the development of internal quality assurance systems.



11

standards might be achieved and allow for the provision of evidence to support the 
status of quality at HEIs and QAAs. They provide examples of good practice and the 
list is not exhaustive.

PrinciPles
The ASG-QA are based on the following principles to ensure the success of quality 
assurance in higher education in Africa: (a) quality and quality assurance are prima-
rily the responsibility of HEIs; and (b) the autonomy, identity and integrity of HEIs 
are acknowledged and respected. 

HEIs and QAAs can adapt the standards and guidelines to fit their own systems and 
contexts based on evidence that they produce. 

scoPe
The ASG-QA apply to all types of HEIs in Africa irrespective of the mode of study or 
place of delivery, including transnational and cross-border delivery. The ASG-QA 
address students through the whole cycle of their university life, thus referring always 
to both undergraduate and postgraduate students, unless otherwise stated. Moreover, 
when addressing the staff of HEIs, all staff, from academic, research, and administra-
tive to technical/support staff are concerned, unless otherwise stated.  

The ASG-QA should be applied in cognisance of existing qualifications frameworks 
and credit transfer and accumulation systems operational in the continent, since 
these also act as catalysts for the enhancement of transparency and mutual trust in 
the provision of higher education. 

The standards and guidelines are presented in three Parts: Part A focuses on the 
internal quality assurance (IQA) of HEIs; Part B describes the standards and meth-
odologies used for external quality assurance (EQA) of HEIs; and Part C focuses on 
the internal quality assurance of QAAs. The quality provision of open and distance 
learning (ODL) is incorporated into the IQA implemented by HEIs. 

HEIs should develop their IQA systems according to Part A of the ASG-QA. The QAAs 
should undertake their quality assurance activities (Part C) in accordance with the 
standards and guidelines should articulated in Part B. QAAs should use the principles, 
practices and methodologies for EQA (Part B) when conducting quality assurance 
regardless of the approach (programme accreditation, institutional accreditation, 
quality audits, reviews) at HEIs. QAAs should also acknowledge the IQA standards 
and guidelines used by the institutions (Part A), and so ensure that the internal 
practices of the HEIs are directly relevant to any EQA that they undergo. 

Consequently, the three parts of the ASG-QA should be seen as a whole as they are 
interlinked and, together, form the basis for an African QA framework. Figure 1 
depicts the interlinkage of the three parts. 



12

Figure 1: interlinkage oF the three Parts oF the asg-Qa

Internal 
Used by HEIs:

•  to assure their own quality
•  when doing self-assessment  
 for the purpose of quality  
 enhancement

Part A
IQA

Part B
EQA

Part C
QAA ASG-QA

Internal 
Used by QAAs:
•  to assure the quality of 
    their own activities
•  for self-assessment in
    preparation of EQA

External 
Used by QAAs:
•  when conducting audits or  
 programme accreditation  
 at HEIs

IQA – Internal Quality Assurance
EQA – External Quality Assurance
QAA – Quality Assurance Agency



13

PArt A:  
StAndArdS And 
GuidelineS for internAl 
QuAlity ASSurAnce
introduction
In line with the principle that HEIs have the primary responsibility for the quality 
of their provision and assurance thereof, Part A presents standards and guidelines 
for IQA at the level of the institutions, but also incorporates standards and guidelines 
for ODL modes. The standards and guidelines cover areas that are considered essen-
tial for the attainment of the provision of quality higher education, focusing mainly 
on: institutional governance, policies and processes that promote quality higher 
education; teaching and learning environment; research and innovation; collabora-
tion and community engagement.  

standard 1. Vision, mission and strategic oBjectiVes 

Standard
The institution shall have published vision and mission statements that reflect 
its commitment to continuous quality enhancement; strategic objectives and 
clear policies and procedures that are consistent with its vision and mission. 

Guidelines
The institutional vision, mission and strategic objectives:

Are publicly disclosed; reflect the aspirations and needs of stakeholders, and a) 
indicate strategic development plans and targets. 
Concerning QA, are translated into clear policies and strategic plans, which b) 
are operationalised into achievable goals.  

The institution ensures that there is a robust and well-functioning QA system for its 
entire activities (academic, research and community engagement), and that facilitates 
the coordination of the approval of policies, procedures and mechanisms. The insti-
tution, therefore, ensures that:

The vision and mission statements and strategic objectives reflect commitment a) 
to quality enhancement;



14

Various forms of planning (for example, strategic, institutional, academic, and b) 
financial) are coordinated to ensure the quality of academic outcomes; 
Medium- and long-term plans reflect the programmes being offered, as well as c) 
its research focus to ensure sustainability and continuous improvement;
The formulation of the plans is collegial, they promote a high degree of insti-d) 
tutional integrity and responsiveness to change, and they are known to stake-
holders; and
There is continuous and periodic monitoring, evaluation and benchmarking of e) 
processes, including self-assessment of academic programmes and institutional 
self-assessment for purposes of continual improvement.

standard 2. goVernance and management

Standard
The institution shall have clearly stated governance and management struc-
tures. This will ensure sound and ethical governance and management, includ-
ing robust QA practices that support the achievement of its mission and legal 
mandate.

Guidelines
The institution: 

Has qualified, competent and experienced leadership to oversee the develop-a) 
ment and management of a quality culture within the institution;
Has relevant governance and management bodies, such as the University Coun-b) 
cil, Senate, Management Board, Student Body; and various committees, each 
with a clear mandate, duties, responsibilities, powers, privileges and tenure; 
and these bodies are properly coordinated to ensure efficiency, effectiveness 
and quality;
Has a QA policy and structure, which flow down through all levels;c) 
Has clear communication systems and networks for the promotion of internal d) 
and external information dissemination for public accountability;
Makes responsible use of its autonomy; e) 
Has policies and procedures for the delegation of authority, whenever f) 
needed; 
Enables students to participate in decision-making in relevant governance g) 
bodies;
Ensures regular consultations with stakeholders, reports and follows up actions h) 
on key issues of policy and operations to promote quality, cohesion, harmony 
and identity within the institution;
Emphasises ethics, transparency, and academic integrity throughout its teach-i) 
ing, learning and research activities;



15

Promotes a high degree of institutional integrity and responsiveness by advo-j) 
cating and demonstrating honesty and non-discrimination in its treatment of 
staff, students and members of the public and in the management of institu-
tional affairs;
Publishes and disseminates on a regular basis, impartial and objective qualita-k) 
tive and quantitative information about courses offered, research undertaken 
and community services;
Has developed and implemented effective processes for deterring, detecting l) 
and dealing with misconduct by students or staff;
Has policies and activated procedures to manage conflict of interest; and m) 
Has effective, systematic, timely and fair processes for the investigation of n) 
complaints, grievances and appeals by students, staff and other 
stakeholders.

standard 3. human resources

Standard
The institution shall have policies on human resources that are inclusive, and 
that ensure recruitment and retention of adequate numbers of qualified and 
competent staff to achieve its mission and carry out its legal mandate.

Guidelines
The quality of staff is the key to the quality of the higher education institution and, 
therefore, it: 

Has clear policies and procedures that ensure equal opportunities and actual a) 
gender equality in human resources for recruitment, retention, and promotion 
of staff that is based on qualification, competence and skills;
Has a core of full-time staff and keeps up-to-date records of staff numbers, b) 
qualifications and employment turnover rates;
Has clear policies and procedures for continuous staff development;c) 
Has clear contractual agreements with staff that outline the conditions of d) 
employment and are aligned with any legislative requirements of the country 
of the institution;
Provides adequate staff support facilities and services;e) 
Undertakes periodic monitoring, evaluation, and appraisal of staff; andf) 
Adheres to (local/regional) norms for student-faculty ratios that promote stu-g) 
dent-centred learning.  



16

standard 4. Financial resource management 

Standard
The institution shall have adequate financial resources and prudent financial 
management that are aligned to its mission, objectives and mandate to ensure 
quality education.

Guidelines
Financial sustainability is the backbone of any institution, and adequate financial 
resources and prudent financial management should be conducted within an approved 
framework of institutional strategies, policies and procedures, which enable the 
institution to meet its financial needs to ensure quality academic outcomes. The 
institution has:

Adequate financial resources to carry out its mandate and objectives effectively a) 
and efficiently;
A diversified financial and sustainable resource base, and ensures a balanced b) 
allocation of resources to core functions of teaching and learning, research, 
and community engagement;
A prudent financial management system, which includes strategies, policies c) 
and procedures for budgeting, resource allocation, repairs and maintenance of 
infrastructure, asset management, debt management and financial 
reporting;
A system to address the risks, gaps and challenges identified for continuous d) 
improvement; and
Monitoring, evaluation (through financial audits) and benchmarking processes e) 
for the financial management system using international best practices or some 
other basis of accounting appropriate for the institution.

standard 5. inFrastructure and Facilities 

Standard
The institution shall have adequate and appropriate infrastructure, facilities 
and resources to support teaching, learning and research. 

Guidelines
For a good higher education experience, institutions provide a range of resources to 
assist students’ learning. 

Infrastructure and facilities are in line with the goals and aims of the higher educa-
tion institution, the programmes on offer, the teaching and learning strategy, as well 
as research. 
The institution has:



17

Academic, administrative and recreational facilities (lecture theatres, seminar a) 
rooms, staff offices, laboratories, studios, workshops, etc.) adequate for the 
number of students and staff;
A properly organised library equipped with facilities and resources (physical b) 
and/or electronic); adequate for the number of students and staff;  
Adequate Information and Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, c) 
including affordable, high speed and dedicated connectivity. 
Facilities that conform to appropriate national health and safety provisions; d) 
and
Facilities accessible for persons with disabilities. e) 

In the case of E-learning, the institution ensures: 
Sufficient infrastructure to address technical support in terms of:a) 

Server space,i. 
Redundancy or load balancing,ii. 
Technical help desk,iii. 
Reliable internet access, andiv. 
Reliable technical services in terms of back-up and remote services; v. 
and 
Resources to develop the knowledge and skills of their ICT vi. 
practitioners.

That it has an ICT plan for purposes of:b) 
Maintaining and upgrading of technologies; andi. 
Ensuring reliability, privacy, safety and security.ii. 

That there is consistency and coherency of the technical framework for students c) 
and academic staff, which ensures that any change in technology is introduced 
in a way that minimises its impact on students and academic staff. Therefore, 
the institution has:

A clear structure for communicating changes in software programmes, i. 
hardware or technical system / procedure when a student or staff pro-
ceeds from one course to another,
A training programme / process for both staff and students when new ii. 
software or a new system is adopted,
Access to training by off-campus or virtual students, andiii. 
Learning policy on new software when a student or tutor proceeds from iv. 
one course to another.

That hardware, software and technical support are an important element of d) 
e-learning and, therefore, the institution has the following in place:

A help desk that operates 24 hours and 7 days a week,i. 

3)  Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area (ESG), 
 (http://www.enqa.eu/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/ESG_3edition-2.pdf), p.25-26.

http://www.enqa.eu/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/ESG_3edition-2.pdf


18

A system for monitoring and supporting a range of hardware / ii. 
software,
Clearly stated technical expectations,iii. 
A system for Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), which should be iv. 
assessed and feedback given to students.

standard 6. student recruitment, admission, certiFication 
and suPPort serVices

Standard
The institution shall have pre-defined, published and consistently applied 
policies and procedures that ensure fair and equitable recruitment and admis-
sion, progression, certification and support services through all phases of the 
student’s lifecycle, and in issues concerning students’ future employability.

The institution shall have documented policies and strategies that promote 
students’ welfare and guidance in curricular, vocational and personal areas.

Guidelines
Providing conditions and support that are necessary for students to make progress 
in their academic career is in the best interests of the individual students, programmes 
and institutions. It is vital to have fit-for-purpose admission, recognition and com-
pletion procedures.

Therefore, the institution has clear guidelines and strategies:
For marketing/promoting the institution and its programmes, recruitment, a) 
admission, selection and registration;
That promote diversity in admission, including gender mainstreaming and b) 
consideration of disadvantaged groups and persons with disabilities, where 
applicable;
That ensure that students admitted meet minimum general and programme-c) 
specific entry requirements;
That ensure monitoring, evaluation and benchmarking for improvement of d) 
enrolment management; 
That guarantee continual collection and compilation of data on students’ e) 
admission, progress and performance, and graduation rates;  
That promote student retention and progression, and address issues concerning f) 
drop-out rates;
That ensure rigorous processes for issuance and storage of certificates; andg) 
That ensure storage of detailed records and transcripts, indicating the list of h) 
courses, units and grades.



19

The needs of a diverse student population (such as mature, part-time, employed and 
international students as well as students with disabilities) and the shift towards 
student-centred learning and flexible modes of learning and teaching, are taken into 
account when allocating, planning and providing learning resources and student 
support.

Support services may be organised in a variety of ways depending on the institutional 
context. However, the internal quality assurance ensures that all resources are fit-
for-purpose, accessible, and that students are informed about the services available 
to them.

Students need guidance, and appropriate provision is made to advise and assist them 
in curricular, vocational and personal domains. Adequate provision is made for infor-
mation and advice to potential students during the application and enrolment phases. 
The institution has guidelines for the promotion of students’ learning by:

Advising them on academic issues;a) 
Advising them on financial matters;b) 
Providing health and personal counselling services; and c) 
Providing career guidance. d) 

The institution supports and develops appropriate strategies for the creation and 
functioning of cultural, artistic and sports facilities and associations.  

standard 7. design, aPProVal, monitoring and eValuation oF 
study Programmes 

Standard
The institution shall have policies and systems that ensure the design and 
development, monitoring and evaluation of quality, relevant study programmes 
that are learning outcomes-based and aligned with the needs of stakeholders; 
and that contribute to the achievement of its mission, and are commensurate 
with national, regional and international standards.

In the case of ODL, the provider shall have in place mechanisms for pre-testing 
or piloting the learning materials to ensure that they are at the learners’ level 
and that the learners will be able to use them without difficulty. 



20

Guidelines
The institution:

Has policies, procedures and processes for introducing new programmes with a) 
learning outcomes and that are competence-based, and for amending or phas-
ing out standing programmes and programmes are subject to continuous moni-
toring and evaluation (including periodic external review) and development to 
ensure currency, quality and relevance; 
Has academic programmes that are in line with its mission and objectives and b) 
address the expectations and needs of stakeholders; therefore, the programmes 
show range, depth, coherence, quality and relevance; are up to date and ade-
quate in content and scope, promoting core content, ideas, values and the 
acquisition of employability skills, such as work-related learning/attachment/
internship/traineeship;
Ensures that programme structures and credit hours/units are in accord with c) 
international norms for the amount of study required for each qualification it 
offers (or for the level of the qualifications awarded); and that programmes are 
approved by the relevant national QAA and professional bodies, where 
applicable; 
Has effective mechanisms for stakeholder participation in curriculum design, d) 
review and validation, including feedback from students, alumni and 
employers; 
Has policies requiring formulated learning outcomes to be defined and docu-e) 
mented for all programmes and courses, and ensures that the programme 
specifications are accessible to learners (or stakeholders);
Has structures and procedures for the approval of programmes by relevant f) 
bodies, such as the Senate, and authorities such as professional bodies, if 
applicable;
Has programmes that are delivered by adequate, qualified and competent staff g) 
with pedagogical skills; 
Has appropriate formal agreements for all programmes offered in partnership h) 
with other institutions, specifying in detail the roles and responsibilities of 
both partners, including teaching commitments and QA arrangements; and
Ensures that the formulated learning outcomes are benchmarked against level i) 
descriptors of national or regional Qualifications Frameworks, as applicable. 

In the case of ODL, the pre-testing of learning materials is essential for ensuring 
that the learners will be able to achieve the objectives or intended learning outcomes. 
The broad requirement of pretesting should be made available, for example:



21

Students’ understanding of the objectives; a) 
Language of presentation;b) 
Explanation of concepts, ideas and theories;c) 
Use of examples for illustration;d) 
Activities and practice exercises given, and feedback provided;e) 
Use of symbols or icons;f) 
Navigational devices for online materials;g) 
Motivate and sustain learners’ interests; andh) 
Use didactic concepts in writing modules.i) 

standard 8. teaching, learning and assessment

Standard
The institution shall put in place, in a way that is consistent with its vision 
and mission, policies and procedures that promote learning and acquisition 
of appropriate knowledge, competencies and skills; and assure fair and trans-
parent assessment based on student-centred assessment. 

The assessment principles, standards and procedures are explicit and made 
available publicly to both students and staff.

Guidelines
Teaching and learning is one of the core activities of a higher education institution, 
and it is important that the academic staff and facilitators ensure quality student 
experience to enable the students to acquire appropriate knowledge, competences 
and skills.

The institution ensures that:
The teaching, learning and assessment strategies are student-centred and flex-a) 
ible; motivate students’ self-reflection and engagement in the learning 
process;
The environment and resources are appropriate and adequate to support each b) 
student;
There are systems in place for periodic monitoring, assessment and evaluation c) 
of the teaching and learning approaches for quality improvement; and
There are mechanisms for students to provide feedback on their learning d) 
experience.



22

In the case of ODL: 
e) The decision on the medium or media of delivery should take into account  

 the following:
Accessibility to the learners,i. 
Cost of using it, both by the institution at installation and mainte-ii. 
nance, as well as learner cost,
Teaching strengths in relation to specific content, iii. 
Its capacity in creating inter-activity, iv. 
Organisational requirements for development,v. 
Its novelty, andvi. 
Speed within which it can be set up.vii. 

f) There are face-to-face sessions to provide general orientation and  
 introduction to the course materials at the commencement of the course;

g) There are special face-to-face sessions for difficult aspects of the course 
  during the programme/course; and 

h) There are face-to-face sessions to provide some revision work to learners  
 before examinations.

Student assessment is one of the most important elements of higher education 
because the outcomes of such assessment have a profound effect on students’ pro-
gression and future careers. It is, therefore, important that assessment is carried out 
professionally at all times. This implies that:

The assessment and procedures are published and consistently applied, and a) 
include:

A range of assessment methods (e.g. coursework, projects, research, i. 
dissertation and examinations to serve formative and summative 
assessment purposes), 
Internal and external moderation,ii. 
Invigilation procedures,iii. 
Monitoring of student progress,iv. 
Validity and reliability of assessment practices,v. 
Recording of assessment results and settling of disputes, andvi. 
Rigour and security of assessment system;vii. 

Assessment standards are spelled out for each programme and are competence- b) 
or outcomes-based, where applicable;
Assessment is carried out by competent and impartial examiners; c) 
Integrity of examinations and award of degrees are ensured to guard against d) 
examination malpractice; 
There are regular objective feedback to students on their strengths and weak-e) 
nesses, and appropriate counselling support for improvement;
There is a disciplinary and appeals process for students who may feel aggrieved; f) 
and
There is a QA handbook, which is known to staff and students.  g) 



23

standard 9. research and innoVation 

Standard
The institution shall encourage, promote, and engage in innovative research 
consistent with its policies and strategic plans, and address national, regional, 
continental, and international needs. The institution shall encourage innova-
tion in its teaching, learning and research.

The institution shall ensure that the management of postgraduate studies is 
conducted within an approved framework of institutional policies and plans 
that ensure quality ethical research. 

Guidelines
Research is one of the core activities of a higher education institution, and the insti-
tution therefore requires an institution-wide research policy that sets the direction 
of its research. The policy is at both institutional and research-programme level 
(postgraduate studies) to ensure proper engagement in research. The institution 
ensures that:

There is a shared understanding of the nature, role and goals of research;a) 
There are standards, procedures and processes for the approval of research b) 
proposals, and theses, and the conduct and supervision of research studies;
There are policies, research management systems and strategies, adequate c) 
infrastructure and resources that facilitate all staff to undertake innovative 
research, and publish research results;
There are standards and processes for the approval of research proposals and d) 
theses, in line with the research needs of the national or regional context, and 
capacity building possibilities for researchers, management of research part-
nerships and research contracts, handling of intellectual property and com-
mercialisation of research, and effective and trustworthy management of 
research information;
There is adequate academic integrity through the establishment and use of e) 
appropriate research committees and boards to ensure academic integrity; 
The research undertaken is relevant and responsive to the needs for academic f) 
advancement and community development expectations; and
There is effective monitoring and evaluation of the research system. g) 



24

standard 10. community engagement 

Standard
The institution shall encourage engagement in community outreach pro-
grammes as part of its social responsibility.  

Guidelines
A higher education institution is not only responsible for teaching, learning and research, 
but also for serving society. The institution ensures that community engagement activi-
ties are conducted within institutional policies and strategies that facilitate collabora-
tion between the institution and its larger communities (local, national, regional, 
continental and global) for the mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and resources 
in a context of partnership and reciprocity. 

For the benefit of the students, institution, and society, the institution incorporates 
community engagement in its activities, with the objective of:

Enriching scholarship, research, and creative activities; a) 
Enhancing teaching and learning; b) 
Facilitating preparation of educated and engaged citizens; c) 
Strengthening democratic values and civic responsibility in students; d) 
Addressing critical societal issues and contribute to public good. e) 

The institution should ensure that there are mechanisms for partnering with other 
stakeholders in the community for sustainable development. 

standard 11. inFormation management system

Standard
The institution shall ensure that it collects, analyses, and makes use of relevant 
information for the effective management of its programmes of study and other 
activities.

Guidelines
Reliable data is crucial for informed decision-making and for understanding what is 
working and what challenges need to be addressed. Effective processes for collecting 
and analysing information about academic programmes and other activities of the 
institution feed into the internal QA system.

The information gathered will depend on the vision and mission of the institution. 
However, the following points are important to address:

Key performance indicators;a) 



25

Profile of student population (including gender);b) 
Learning resources and available student services;c) 
Student progression, drop-out rates, and graduation rates;d) 
Satisfaction of students and alumni with programmes and teaching provided; e) 
and
Career paths for students.f) 

It is important that both students and staff are involved in analysis and follow-up 
activities to address the shortcomings.

standard 12. PuBlic communication

Standard
The institution shall publish information about its activities, including pro-
grammes, in a clear, accurate and objective manner; and ensure that the infor-
mation is up-to-date and accessible.

The institution shall ensure that promotion of its programmes is carried out 
in a fair and ethical manner, following acceptable best practices, and comply 
with all relevant legislation.

Guidelines
Information about the institution’s activities is useful for prospective and current 
students, alumni and other stakeholders, and the public. The information includes 
programmes offered, selection criteria, expected learning outcomes, qualifications 
they award, teaching and learning procedures, graduation rates, learning opportuni-
ties, and information about the employment of its graduates. The institution and 
departments ensure that:  

Promotional materials give a clear and accurate view of the programme, its a) 
provision, objectives and outcomes, including:

Identification of the programme,i. 
The body awarding the qualification and its accreditation status;ii. 
Mode of delivery,iii. 
Level of the programme on the National Qualifications Framework iv. 
(NQF), where applicable,
Charges involved,v. 
Terms and conditions relevant to the programme,vi. 
Conditions for withdrawal from the programme, vii. 
Financial agreements with the provider; andviii. 
Rights, obligations and commitments expected of the student.ix. 



26

Students are fully informed of the issues that affect them with respect to the b) 
management of the programme, such as:

Language of communication,i. 
Required access to technologies, in the case of ODL,ii. 
Technical competencies of students required to enrol in the programme, iii. 
in the case of ODL,
Timeframe in which the programmes are offered and nature of learning iv. 
outcomes,
Required texts and access to reference materials,v. 
Understanding of independent learning expectations,vi. 
Schedule for face-to-face interactions, in the case of ODL,vii. 
Schedule for examinations,viii. 
Schedule for submission of assignments, and ix. 
Collection of certificates.x. 

standard 13. collaBoration, staFF and student moBility 

Standard
The institution shall have mechanisms that promote collaboration with other 
HEIs, professional bodies, research institutions and relevant social actors at 
national, regional, continental and international levels and to facilitate mobil-
ity of students and staff.

Guidelines
The institution has policies that promote the mobility of academic staff, researchers 
and students in the programme, internationally. The degree-awarding institution 
ensures appropriate and high quality delivery of programmes at the partner institu-
tion. The collaborating institutions:

Ensure that programmes under collaboration are of the required standard and a) 
rigour as those of the parent institution;
Ensure that students benefit from the same standard of resources as those for b) 
the regular students of the awarding institution;
Take the responsibility to assure the quality of the educational provision under c) 
collaboration;
Ensure that the collaborating institutions are approved by the relevant QAA/d) 
professional body and are subject to periodic quality audits; and
Ensure that students are fully informed of the nature of the collaboration e) 
between the institutions concerned.

If the programme is offered via collaborative arrangements, the provider clearly 
defines the rights and responsibilities of parties, legal ownership, accreditation status 
of the programme, and resources available for the programme.



27

PArt b:  
StAndArdS And 
GuidelineS for externAl 
QuAlity ASSurAnce
introduction
It is important that HEIs subject themselves to periodic external assessment for 
purposes of accountability and quality enhancement of their provisions. Part B 
describes the methodologies (or standards) used for external quality assurance (EQA) 
of HEIs. This section takes into account the standards and guidelines in Part A (IQA) 
for HEIs, ensures that IQA examined is relevant to and efficient for the concerned 
higher education institution, and that there is consistency between internal quality 
assurance undertaken by institutions themselves and external quality assurance. 
This section covers objectives of EQA, designing mechanisms that are fit for purpose, 
independence, decisions and reporting, periodic review, and complaints and 
appeals. 

standard 1. oBjectiVes oF external Quality assurance and 
consideration For internal Quality assurance 

Standard
External quality assurance shall ensure that the higher education institution 
has clearly articulated vision and mission statements, and it shall help the 
institution ensure the effectiveness of its internal QA mechanisms, providing 
an additional instrument for assessing institutional quality.

Guidelines
External quality assurance is based on the institution’s responsibility for the quality 
of their academic programmes and other provisions and, therefore, it is important 
that external quality assurance recognises and supports the institutional responsi-
bility for its QA. EQA complements an effective IQA system and, therefore, assists 
the higher education institution to:

Appreciate the link between IQA and EQA;a) 
Adhere to established QA principles, standards and guidelines in the higher b) 
education sector;
Develop and entrench an institutional quality culture by establishing mecha-c) 
nisms for continuous quality improvement / enhancement; 



28

Provide a basis to benchmark inputs, processes and outputs with other HEIs d) 
nationally, regionally and internationally;
Determine the institution’s capacity to offer academic programmes;e) 
Assess institutional compliance with legal and other requirements;f) 
Provide independent evidentiary information to its stakeholders, the general g) 
public and international community that it is offering quality higher education; 
and
Be recognised and accepted nationally, regionally, continentally and h) 
internationally. 

standard 2. designing external Quality assurance 
mechanisms Fit For PurPose

Standard
Standards, guidelines and processes for external quality assurance shall be 
designed to be fit for purpose, defined to achieve the intended aims and objec-
tives of EQA, and to strengthen IQA systems at institutions.

Guidelines
It is necessary that standards, guidelines, and processes developed and implemented 
by QAAs and the institutions are created in consultation with stakeholders in order 
to address all academic activities of the higher education system and for acceptability. 
The standards include:

Standards and guidelines for periodic / cyclical programme accreditation / evalu-a) 
ation / assessment / audit; and/or
Standards and guidelines for periodic / cyclical institutional accreditation / evalu-b) 
ation / assessment / audit.

standard 3. imPlementation Processes oF external Quality 
assurance

Standard
The standards, processes, and procedures for EQA shall be pre-defined, reliable, 
published, and consistently implemented for purposes of accountability.

Guidelines
External quality assurance is carried out professionally, consistently and transpar-
ently to ensure that it is acceptable to the higher education institution. EQA is carried 
out on the basis of the self-assessment prepared by the institution. The processes for 
EQA include the following activities:

Self-assessment by the institution and production of the SAR/SER;a) 



29

External assessment of the institution through the SAR/SER, site visit to the b) 
institution and interviews with stakeholders of the institution, and documen-
tary evidence to support institutional claims;
Oral report to the management of the institution before the review panel leaves c) 
the institution;
Preliminary report provided to the institution before the final report is d) 
produced; 
Final report of the external review; and e) 
Follow-up activity to ensure that recommendations raised in the final report f) 
are addressed.

standard 4. indePendence oF eValuation

Standard
EQA shall be carried out by panels of external experts drawn from a wide range 
of expertise and experience.

Guidelines
The principle of best practices of external quality assurance is based on the consistent 
use of a wide range of expertise and experiences:

Experts are drawn from academics, employers or professional practitioners, a) 
and students; 

To ensure professionalism, consistency and transparency of output of experts, b) 
it is necessary that they:

Are carefully selected, i. 
Have appropriate skills and are competent to perform tasks assigned ii. 
to them,
Are adequately inducted into EQA principles and procedures before iii. 
undertaking the external review, 
Are independent in their judgements about the quality of the pro-iv. 
gramme or institutions,
Have no conflict of interest with the institution or programme they v. 
are evaluating, and
Sign a Declaration of Independence and No Conflict of Interest Formvi. 

In the case of possible conflicts of interest, the institution is given the oppor-c) 
tunity to object to any member of the proposed review panel; and
Involvement of international experts is considered a good practice in EQA. d) 



30

standard 5. decision and rePorting oF external Quality 
assurance outcomes

Standard
Reports and decisions made as a result of external quality assurance shall be 
clear, based on published standards, processes and procedures, and made acces-
sible, for purposes of accountability. 

Guidelines
The decisions of external quality assurance have a significant impact on institutions 
and programmes that are evaluated, assessed or judged. It is critical that:

External quality assessment decisions are published without undermining the a) 
integrity of the review process; 

The EQA reports are the basis for follow-up actions, hence they are clear, precise b) 
and include:

Purpose of the review,i. 
Context description (of higher education institution),ii. 
Description of procedures, including experts involved,iii. 
Evidence, analysis and findings,iv. 
Commendations/examples of good practice of the institution,v. 
Conclusions,vi. 
Recommendations for follow-up actions;vii. 

The institution is given an opportunity to point out factual errors to ensure the c) 
accuracy of the report; 
The institution is the first to receive the EQA report in the interest of transparency d) 
and fairness, prior to distribution to other parties;
The decisions taken by the responsible body are not subject to external influences; e) 
and
The decisions are in a format that has been made known to the institution con-f) 
cerned (for example, commendations, recommendations, and formal decisions).

standard 6. Periodic reView oF institutions and Programmes

Standard
External quality assurance of institutions and programmes shall be undertaken 
on a cyclical basis. 



31

Guidelines
The length of the review cycle is clearly defined and published:

For academic programmes, the review cycle is consistent with the duration of a) 
the programme, or it reflects the defined validity of the accreditation period;
Depending on the context of the QA system, for institutions, the cyclical insti-b) 
tutional review is carried out preferably every five years; and 
Every cyclical review results in a report of general findings of the review.c) 

standard 7. comPlaints and aPPeals

Standard
The procedure for lodging complaints and appeals shall be clearly defined and 
communicated to the institution concerned.

Guidelines
In order to safeguard the rights of the institution and ensure fairness in the decision-
making process, it is important that the institution has access to the processes that 
allow it to raise issues of concern with the agencies if it can demonstrate that the 
outcome of the external review is not based on sound evidence. It is, therefore, criti-
cal that: 

There is an established appeals system; a) 
The institution is allowed to raise issues of concern consistent with the appeals b) 
system; 
There is a procedure for addressing complaints raised by the general public; c) 
There are clearly defined complaints and appeals processes and procedures, d) 
which are consistently applied; and 
Appeals and complaints are handled professionally, within an agreed period of e) 
time.  

 



32

PArt c:  
internAl QuAlity 
ASSurAnce for QuAlity 
ASSurAnce AGencieS
introduction
Part C of the ASG-QA is for the purpose of internal quality assurance of QAAs through 
self-assessment of its policies, practices, procedures and activities and/or for external 
assessment/evaluation by another body/peer organisation. This section covers poli-
cies, processes and activities of the QAA, legal status, vision and mission, financial 
and human resources, independence, and standards and processes used by the 
QAA.

standard 1. legal status

Standard
The QAA shall be an autonomous legal entity with clearly defined mandate, 
scope and powers. It will be recognised as a quality assurance agency at a 
national/regional level.

Guidelines
When external quality assurance is carried out for regulatory purposes, institutions 
have the security that the outcomes of the process are accepted within the higher 
education system, the stakeholders and the public. The QAA is established by a 
competent authority

The QAA’s legal mandate specifies, among others, its:
Establishment by an appropriate legal instrument such as an Act or Statutes;a) 
Functions and responsibilities, including the scope of quality assurance b) 
activities; 



33

standard 2. Vision and mission statement  

Standard
The QAA shall have written and published vision and mission statements or 
objectives taking the higher education context into account.

Guidelines
The vision, mission and objectives show that: 

Quality assurance is a major activity of the agency;a) 
There is a systematic approach to achieving the vision, mission and objectives b) 
of the QAA;
The objectives are implemented in line with a practical management plan that c) 
is linked to the agency’s resources; and
The custodianship and oversight of vision and mission are appropriate for the d) 
mandate and objectives of the agency.

standard 3. goVernance and management  

Standard 
The QAA shall have clearly defined structures that ensure sound and ethical 
governance and management, including good practices of quality assurance 
that support its mission and legal mandate.

Guidelines
The QAA: 

Has qualified and experienced leadership to oversee the development and man-a) 
agement of best practices in quality assurance in higher education;
Has relevant governance bodies, such as the governing board and various com-b) 
mittees, each with a clear mandate, powers, responsibilities and tenure; which 
are well coordinated to ensure efficiency and effectiveness of its vision, mission 
and strategic objectives;
Has procedures for the appointment of the governing board and the Chief c) 
Executive; 
Has policies and procedures for financial and management decisions; d) 
Has clear communication system of its activities for disseminating information e) 
for public accountability; 
Ensures regular consultation with stakeholders, and follow-up actions on key f) 
issues of policy and operations;
Promotes a high degree of institutional integrity and responsiveness in the g) 
management of institutional affairs by advocating and demonstrating honesty 
and non-discrimination in the treatment of its staff and members of the 
public; 



34

Has effective processes for deterring, detecting and dealing with misconduct h) 
by staff; and 
Has effective, systematic, timely and fair processes for the investigation of i) 
complaints, grievances and appeals by staff.

standard 4. indePendence oF Qaa

Standard
The QAA shall be independent in its operations, outcomes, judgements and 
decisions.

Guidelines  
The QAA makes independent decisions and judgements that are not subject to change 
by third parties. Independence of an agency includes the following:

Organisational independence a) demonstrated by official documentation, such 
as legislative acts or statutes and instruments of governance that stipulate the 
independence of the agency’s work from third parties (e.g. HEIs, governments, 
other stakeholders);
Operational independence: b) the definitions and operations of the agency’s pro-
cedures and methods, nomination and appointment of qualified external 
experts (including the provision of no objection); and
Independence of formal outcomes: c) the final decision of quality assurance activi-
ties remains the responsibility of the QAA. 

Standard 5. PolicieS, ProceSSeS and activitieS 

Standard
The QAA shall undertake its quality assurance activities in accordance with 
the standards and guidelines articulated in Part B of the ASG-QA. 

Guidelines   
It is important that HEIs trust QAAs; the agencies are transparent, and describe and 
publish their objectives and activities, scope of work, expertise; and interaction with 
HEIs and other stakeholders.  

The external quality assurance standards and processes are appropriate for the core 
activities of an institution or programme. These include:

Teaching and learning, research and community work/engagement;a) 
Resources such as finances, staff, and learning resources;b) 
Specific areas such as levels of achievement, relative benchmarking and types c) 
of measures, and general guidelines; and
Specific learning outcomes.d) 



35

In order to carry out its core function of external quality assurance, the QAA conducts 
institutional audits/accreditation and programme accreditation/reviews on a regular 
basis, and provides in advance the framework to the concerned institution. To ensure 
transparency, the QAA’s review/assessment processes include:

Validation of the institution’s self-assessment against the agency’s standards a) 
and processes;  
Appointment of an external peer review panel comprising subject matter spe-b) 
cialists and experts in higher education QA matters;
Site visit by the review panel and interviews with various staff members and c) 
stakeholders of the institution;
Oral report before the review panel leaves the institution;d) 
Preliminary report presented to the institution for factual corrections;e) 
Final report of external review to the institution; andf) 
Follow-up activity of recommendations raised in the final report.g) 

standard 6. internal Quality assurance  

Standard
The QAA shall have in place policies and processes for its own internal quality 
assurance related to defining, assuring and enhancing the quality and integrity 
of its activities. 

Guidelines     
The QAA is accountable to its stakeholders and observes high professional standards 
and integrity by adhering to its guiding and ethical principles, and makes available 
internal quality assurance policies, standards, processes and procedures on its web-
site. The QAA’s decisions are impartial, rigorous, thorough, fair and consistent, even 
if the judgements are made by different panels. The policies, therefore, ensure:

Objectivity and fairness in all its judgements, decisions and conclusions; a) 
Standards and guidelines for external quality assurance for HEIs are of a general b) 
nature, not prescriptive and do not interfere with institutions’ autonomy but 
help to guarantee all stakeholders and the international community of overall 
professionalism, visibility, transparency, credibility, integrity, and public 
accountability in the higher education sub-sector;
Contribution to established national, regional, continental and international c) 
mechanisms for integrity, transparency and public accountability; and 
Professionalism and public acceptance:d) 

All persons involved in its activities are competent and act profession-i. 
ally and ethically,
Timely internal and external feedback mechanisms lead to continuous ii. 
improvement within the agency,
Guards against intolerance of any kind or discrimination,iii. 



36

Outlines the appropriate communication with relevant authorities in iv. 
those jurisdictions in which they operate, and
Any activity carried out and materials produced by consultants are in v. 
line with its standards and guidelines and those of the ASG-QA.

The QAA ensures that standards and processes used for external quality assurance 
are pre-determined, pre-defined, published and made available to institutions ahead 
of external quality assurance procedures. The QAA ensures that:

The standards and processes used to ensure quality and relevance of HEIs, such a) 
as institutional or programme self-assessment and quality assurance proce-
dures, have appropriate follow-up mechanisms for recommendations and 
actions for further improvement.
There is thematic analysis (production of a summary of reports), carried out b) 
from time to time, which describes and analyses the general trends in the find-
ings of external reviews, assessments as well as evaluations of institutions and 
their programmes for possible policy direction. 

standard 7. Financial and human resources

Standard
The QAA shall have adequate and appropriate human, financial and material 
resources to carry out its QA mandate effectively and efficiently.

Guidelines 
The QAA is adequately funded to realise its vision, mission and objectives to:

Ensure it has adequate facilities commensurate with its QA activities;a) 
Recruit adequate and qualified human resourcesb) , to carry out its QA activities; 
cognisant of gender, disadvantaged groups and persons with disabilities; 
Carry out its external QA mandate professionally, effectively and efficiently;c) 
Ensure improvement of its practices and development; andd) 
Inform the public about its activities and results/outcomes.e) 

standard 8. Benchmarking, networking and collaBoration

Standard
The QAA shall promote and participate in international initiatives, workshops 
and conferences, and collaborate with relevant bodies on QA to exchange and 
share experiences and best practices.



37

Guidelines     
It is important that the QAA remains relevant in its activities. The QAA:

Collaborates with all relevant bodies, such as professional bodies, for QA and a) 
accreditation;
Shares accurate, reliable and easily accessible information about standards for b) 
registration/licensing and QA of all modes of education delivery;
Contributes to the development and/or updating of the appropriate regional, c) 
continental and other international conventions on the recognition of courses 
and qualifications, and serves as national or regional information centres as 
appropriate;
Participates in bilateral or multilateral agreements for facilitating the recogni-d) 
tion or determination of equivalences of each country’s qualifications based 
on the procedures and standards included in established international agree-
ments for recognition of courses and qualifications; and 
 Contributes to regional, continental and international efforts to improve the e) 
accessibility of up-to-date, accurate and comprehensive information about 
recognised HEIs or providers. 

standard 9. Periodic reView oF Qaas

Standard
The QAA shall undergo periodic internal and external reviews for continuous 
improvement.

Guidelines   
The QAA has a system for continuous QA of its own practices and activities that 
emphasises flexibility in response to the changing nature of higher education, effec-
tiveness of its operations, and its contribution towards the achievement of its objec-
tives. The QAA, therefore:

Conducts a comprehensive internal self-assessment of its processes, practices a) 
and activities periodically, including data analysis; 
Subjects itself to periodic external review on the basis of self-assessment by b) 
regional, continental or international QA bodies; and
Ensures that required recommendations are disclosed and implemented for c) 
improvement; and
Depending on the context of the QA system, for QAAs, the cyclical review is d) 
carried out preferably every five years. 



38

Annex 1 – DrAftinG 
ProceSS of the ASG-QA
HAQAA Initiative: 
The ASG-QA was developed in the framework of the Harmonisation of African Higher 
Education Quality Assurance and Accreditation (HAQAA) Initiative. The Initiative 
was a service contract between December 2015 and November 2018 to support the 
development of a harmonised quality assurance and accreditation system at insti-
tutional, national, regional and pan-African continental levels, and funded by the 
European Union “Harmonisation, Quality and Accreditation” initiative (EC 
EAC/37/2014).

Technical Working Group: 
The Technical Working Group (TWG) consisted of experts in the quality assurance 
of higher education from different regions: Western, Eastern, Southern, Northern 
and Central Africa. The group included one expert from the European Higher Educa-
tion Area (EHEA) and the work of the group was coordinated by the European Asso-
ciation for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA) and the Association of 
African Universities (AAU). 

Drafting process: 
The draft ASG-QA were based on the existing standards and guidelines of higher 
education already in use in African countries and by regional quality assurance 
networks or associations such as the Inter University Council of East Africa (IUCEA), 
Southern African Development Community (SADC), Association of Arab Universities 
(AARU), Southern African Regional University Association (SARUA) and Conseil 
Africain et Malagache pour l'Enseignement Supérieur (CAMES). Additionally, the 
ASG-QA were benchmarked with the Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance 
in the European Higher Education Area (ESG 2015) and other international standards 
and guidelines. The TWG worked on the draft in several face-to-face meetings and 
a great deal of drafting was carried out by the Chair and individual group members 
in between meetings. 



39

Consultation: 
Mainly through the dissemination channels of the AAU, a consultation survey on 
the draft ASG-QA was disseminated to all major stakeholders: HEIs, QAAs and min-
istries and governing bodies of higher education in Africa, for their input and com-
ments. Feedback was also received from AAU and the African Union Commission 
(AUC). The draft and the survey was available in English, French, Arabic and Portu-
guese. All feedback was considered comprehensively, language by language. 

Alongside the consultation process, to raise awareness, the draft was presented at 
several international conferences such as the International Conference on Quality 
Assurance in Higher Education in Africa (ICQAHEA) conferences in 2016 and 2017 
and the AAU 50th Anniversary conference in June 2017. The draft was also discussed 
and feedback gathered at the Training Course module of the HAQAA Initiative that 
brought together quality assurance experts from across the continent. Furthermore, 
the Advisory Board of the HAQAA Initiative, involving representatives from different 
regions of the continent, provided its support and feedback throughout the 
process. 



40

Annex 2 - Key termS 
Accreditation: A process for verifying or approving a higher education institution 
or quality assurance agency by an authorised external organisation, normally valid 
for a limited period of time. 

African Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Higher Education 
(ASG-QA): The expectations developed within the framework of the HAQAA Initia-
tive for quality assurance in higher education across Africa. 

Agency: (National) quality assurance agency for higher education. 

Expert: See ‘external reviewer’.

External quality assurance: Systematic monitoring and evaluation of the opera-
tions of a quality assurance agency of higher education, and the processes that sup-
port them, to make sure that the standards set out in the ASG-QA are met. 

External review: A thorough evaluation conducted at a quality assurance agency of 
higher education by a qualified team of people that are not employed at the 
agency.   

External review report:   The main output of the review of a higher education insti-
tution or an agency in form of a document reporting in detail on the review, prepared 
by the Review Panel. 

Higher education institution (HEI):   University, college or other organisation that 
delivers higher education. 

External reviewer: An individual contracted to the team that reviews the higher 
education institution or agency under review. He/she should have some experience 
in the higher education sector/quality assurance. 

Guideline: Guidelines describe how standards linked to them may be achieved.
Internal quality assurance: A system and standardised procedures at a higher educa-
tion institution or a quality assurance agency securing fit-for-purpose and quality 
outputs of processes. 



41

Quality assurance: A general term for procedures in internal or external quality 
assurance procedures including accreditation, evaluation, audit both on programme 
and institutional levels and also concerning quality assurance agencies. 

Review Panel: A group of individuals contracted to carry out an external review.  

Self-assessment (report) (SAR): An analytical report prepared by a higher education 
institution or an agency under review, assessing its own performance, to be used as 
main piece of evidence for the Review Panel.  

Site-visit: Normally a two to four day visit of the Review Panel to the premises of a 
higher education institution or quality assurance agency under review to gather 
further information about the operations of the institution or agency, and to cross-
check existing information. The main part of the visit consists of interviews of the 
groups of all important individuals and stakeholders (i.e. agency leadership and staff, 
external reviewers of the agency, representatives of higher education institutions, 
government representatives).

Standard: Refers to the specification of aspects, elements or principles to which an 
institution, programme, higher education institution or quality assurance agency 
should conform or by which quality is judged. 



42

Annex 3 - GloSSAry 
AARU - Association of Arab Universities
AAU – Association of African Universities
ASG-QA – African Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Higher 
Education
AU – African Union
AUC - African Union Commission 
CAMES - Conseil Africain et Malagache pour l'Enseignement Supérieur
CESA - The Continental Education Strategy for Africa
ESG - Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher 
 Education Area
EU – European Union 
EQA – External quality assurance 
FAQs – Frequently asked questions
HAQAA Initiative - The Harmonisation of African Higher Education Quality  Assurance 
and Accreditation Initiative
HEIs – Higher education institutions
ICQAHEA - International Conference on Quality Assurance in Higher Education in 
Africa
ICT - Information and communication technology
IQA – Internal quality assurance
IUCEA - The Inter University Council of East Africa 
NQF - National Qualifications Framework
ODL - Open and distance learning 
PAQAF - Pan-African Quality Assurance and Accreditation Framework
QA – Quality Assurance
QAA – Quality assurance agency 
SAR – Self-assessment report
SADC - Southern African Development Community
SARUA – Southern African Regional University Association
TWG – Technical Working Group



43



This initiative is implemented on behalf of the European and African Union Commissions by:


	African Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ASG-QA)
	Foreword
	introduction
	Background
	Purpose 
	Approach Used in Framing the Standards and Guidelines
	Scope

	Part A:	Standards and Guidelines for Internal Quality Assurance
	Introduction
	Standard 1. Vision, Mission and Strategic Objectives 
	Standard 2. Governance and Management
	Standard 3. Human Resources
	Standard 4. Financial Resource Management 
	Standard 5. Infrastructure and Facilities 
	Standard 6. Student Recruitment, Admission, Certification and Support Services
	Standard 7. Design, Approval, Monitoring and Evaluation of Study Programmes 
	Standard 8. Teaching, Learning and Assessment
	Standard 9. Research and Innovation 
	Standard 10. Community Engagement 
	Standard 11. Information Management System
	Standard 12. Public Communication
	Standard 13. Collaboration, Staff and Student Mobility 

	Part B: Standards and Guidelines for External Quality Assurance
	Introduction
	Standard 1. Objectives of External Quality Assurance and Consideration for Internal Quality Assurance 
	Standard 2. Designing External Quality Assurance Mechanisms Fit for Purpose
	Standard 3. Implementation Processes of External Quality Assurance
	Standard 4. Independence of Evaluation
	Standard 5. Decision and Reporting of External Quality Assurance Outcomes
	Standard 6. Periodic Review of Institutions and Programmes
	Standard 7. Complaints and Appeals

	Part C: Internal Quality Assurance for Quality Assurance Agencies
	Introduction
	Standard 1. Legal Status
	Standard 2. Vision and Mission Statement  
	Standard 3. Governance and Management  
	Standard 4. Independence of QAA
	Standard 5. Policies, Processes and Activities 
	Standard 6. Internal Quality Assurance  
	Standard 7. Financial and Human Resources
	Standard 8. Benchmarking, Networking and Collaboration
	Standard 9. Periodic Review of QAAs

	Annex 1 – Drafting Process of the ASG-QA
	Annex 2 - Key terms 
	Annex 3 - Glossary 

