
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Context
Living in a city or a metropolitan area is a
great  promotion  for  human  well-being,
given  its  convenient  mode  of  life  and
efficient  way  of  working.  This  is  so  for
Kenyan cities, Nairobi included. However,
concerns  are  emerging  from  residents
and  scientists  that  the  unprecedented
development of cities has caused a range
of  environmental  problems  and  exerts
huge  pressure  on  natural  ecosystems
that  we  rely  on  (UNEP,  2016;  Asian
Coalition  for  Housing  Rights  2004;
Muthama,  2019a).  Several  parts  of
Kenyan  cities  continue  to  experience
overwhelming solid waste challenges and
air  pollution  impacts  among  other
environmental concerns.

The 2017 Kenya Economic Survey
estimated  that  19.9  million  Kenyans,
representing  38.3%  of  the  population,
suffered  from  respiratory  ailments  that
are exacerbated by poor air quality. The
2019 Kenya Economic Survey estimated
that  21.8  million  Kenyan,  representing
39.3%  of  Kenyans,  suffered  from  the
respiratory  ailment,  indicating  a  1%
increase of  the  ailments  at  the  national
level.  This  is  a  pointer  that  the  air
pollution problem may be increasing. 

Current  trends,  including
industrialization  and  urbanization,
suggest that air quality in Kenya cities will
worsen  over  time  unless  targeted
interventions  are  adopted  in  the  short,
medium,  and  long  term  and  the
institutional  and  technical  capacity  of
organizations  responsible  for  Air  Quality
Management  (AQM)  is  strengthened.
The  2019  Kenya  Economic  Survey
indicated  that  the  total  number  of

environmental crimes reported to the Kenya
National  Environment  Management
Authority  (NEMA)  rose  within  the  period
2014  to  2018.   For  example,  97  crimes
were  reported  in  2017,  rising  to  156  in
2018.  The  increase  in  reporting  may  be
attributed to the introduction of  equipment
for  checking  air  quality.   This  further
confirms the need for continuous monitoring
of indoor and outdoor air pollution in Kenya

However,  the efforts by the national
and  county  governments,  to  enforce
existing regulations is hampered by a lack
of  high-quality  and  continuous  air  quality
monitoring data (Muthama, 2019b). Without
an understanding of the baseline air quality
in  Kenya  and  how  it  varies  across  the
country  as  well  as  over  time,  the  NEMA
Standards  and  Regulations  cannot  be
effectively enforced..

Study Approach and 
Results

The  African  Agenda  2063,  Kenya's
vision  2030  and  the  Sustainable
Development Goal number 11 emphasises
on the importance of paying closer attention
to  city's  environmental  dynamics  for  the
well-being  of  its  residents,  the  city  of
Nairobi  included.  The  theoretical
perspective taken for this study was based
on systems theory.  Systems theory  states
that  there  is  a  relationship  between
structure and behaviour. Cities are created
by  social  systems  and  rely  on  complex
networks  of  human-made  systems  to
supply  them.  Also,  this  study  used  the
approach of incorporating core concepts of
urban  metabolism  in  assessing  urban
system  sustainability  in  the  context  of

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Enhancing Our Care for the Urban 
Air We Breathe
 Prof Nzioka J. Muthama

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

49

The harm caused by air pollution 
in Kenya’s urban areas is 
estimated to be high but 
documentation is at infancy. 

Air Quality Management 
(AQM), a pillar in green 
growth, is hindered by limited
measurements. There is need 
to Investment in AQM.

Coordinated systems thinking 
interventions are needed in 
AQM, institutional capacity 
strengthening, bolstering the 
legal and regulatory 
framework, climate change 
knowledge

Urban sustainability indicators 
are useful for policymakers to 
gauge the socio-economic and 
environmental impacts, 
including air quality, of 
policies and practices. 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

energy and water use, with a focus on the
City of Nairobi. The concept of metabolism
mimics  human  metabolism:  a  process  by
which  the  human  body  converts  what
he/she  eats  and  drinks  into  energy.
Practically, the study of urban metabolism
involved  ‘big  picture’  quantification  of  the
inputs,  outputs  and  storage  of  energy,
water,  nutrients,  materials  and wastes for
an urban region.

Urban  sustainability  indicators  were
used.  They  are  tools  that  allow  city
planners, city managers and policymakers
to  gauge  the  socio-economic  and
environmental  impact  of,  for  example,
current  urban  designs,  infrastructures,
policies, waste disposal systems, pollution
and  access  to  services  by  citizens.  They
allow  for  the  diagnosis  of  problems  and
pressures,  and  thus  the  identification  of
areas  that  would  profit  from  being
addressed  through  good  governance  and
science-based  responses.  Understanding
the  relationship  between  resource
consumption  and  the  production  of
products  and  wastes  is  the  key  to
understanding  how  urban  ecosystems
persist. 

Satellite  data  is  increasingly  being
employed to address problems arising from
inadequate  air-quality  monitoring  data.
Satellite  sensors  such  as  MODIS
(Moderate-resolution  imaging
spectroradiometer)  and MISR (Multi-angle
imaging  spectroradiometer)  can  provide
aerosol  retrievals  that  are  suitable  for
studying  air  pollution  trends  (Muthama,
2019a).

In this  study,  MODIS data were used.
Satellite-based ariel averaged monthly data
for four parameters, over Nairobi, as a case
study,  were  downloaded from the MODIS
website.  Analyses and visualizations used
in  this  study  were  produced  with  the
Giovanni  online  data  system,  developed
and  maintained by  the  NASA GES DISC
(Acker and Leptoukh, 2007).  Sulfur dioxide
(SO2)  surface  mass  concentration  and
carbon dioxide (CO2)  in  free troposphere
were obtained. Monthly data for the period
January  1980  to  July  2017,  for  the  two
parameters were collected and subjected to
time series analysis.

Air pollutants that cause negative health
and  environmental  impacts  include
Particulate  Matter  (PM),  ozone  (O3),
carbon  monoxide  (CO),  nitrogen  oxides
(NOx),  sulfur  oxides  (SOx),  and  volatile
organic  compounds  (VOCs).  The  key
pollutants  analysed  in  this  study,  namely
SO2, is a by-product of burning fossil fuels
such as crude oil,  furnace oil,  diesel, and
coal.  SO2  can  be  transformed  in  the
atmosphere  into  sulfates  that  appear  as
fine particles.

Data  analysis  revealed  that  the  air
quality over Nairobi has deteriorated in the
period  1980  to  2017  as  depicted  by  the
temporal pattern of the SO2. From around
1998 there is a marked increasing trend of
SO2. The annual increase is estimated at
0.08 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3)
per year. There is a clear seasonal pattern
with  the  December  to  February  season

having the highest values and trend. The
month of February has the highest trend
of  1.09  µg/M3  per  year.  Apart  from
marked  seasonality,  there  are  also
seasonal  spikes  which  beg  for  further
understanding as regards the well-being
of the City residents. Kenya’s air quality
regulations  (GoK,  2014)  provide  for  an
ambient tolerance limit of 50 µg/m3. This
implies  that  in  a  couple  of  decades
Nairobi  will  experience  severe  SO2
pollution if business as usual  continues.
Energy waste over Nairobi in the form of
SO2  is  increasing  drastically.  As  the
nation of Kenya industrialises in line with
Kenya's  vision  2030,  the  situation  will
only  grow  worse  if  concerted  mitigating
measures, by way of policy and practice,
are  not  initiated  and  maintained.  This
calls  for  measures  to  ensure  that  AQM
systems  are  operationalized  across  the
country.  Also,  a  systems-thinking
approach in solving the problem will bear
fruits (Muthama 2019b).

Analysis of  CO2, a greenhouse gas,
showed an increasing trend from 1980 to
2017.  The warming is likely caused by
both  urbanisation  and  human  activities.
This is in agreement with other studies in
many  cities  around  the  world  (Zhang
2013; Barnes 2009). This begs for further
understanding  of  the  sustainability  of
Kenyan cities under changing climate..

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 County  Governments  should  make

cities and urban areas more compact
thus more energy efficient

 Green spaces should be created that
help remove particulate matter 

 Ministry of  Environment and Forestry
(MoE&F),  together  with  county
governments,  should  work  towards
improving urban waste management,
including the capture of methane gas
emitted  from  waste  sites  as  an
alternative to incineration

 National  and  County  governments
should create and maintain spaces for
safe walking and cycling

 National and County governments and
other  key  stakeholders  should
operationalize cost-effective air quality
monitoring systems 

 Public,  Private partnership should be
instituted to entrench citizen science in
monitoring and reporting air quality

 Stakeholders  should  embrace  and
implement Systems thinking approach
and Urban metabolisms concept in Air
quality management and Governance

Medium-Term
 MoE&F  should  foster  institutional

collaboration  among  public  officials,

researchers,  private  sector  and  civil
society  in  advancing the  use of  lower-
emission  cookstoves  and/or  cleaner
fuels  in  place of   traditional  household
solid fuel including firewood 

 Line ministries should promote the use
of  low-emissions  fuels  and  renewable
combustion-free power sources, such as
solar, wind or hydropower

 MoE&F should strategising to move way
completely from kerosene 

 Line  ministries  and  other  stakeholders
should improve the energy efficiency of
homes  and  commercial  buildings
through  insulation  and  passive  design
principles such as natural ventilation and
lighting

 Set  up  robust  Air  quality  monitoring
systems for each urban area in Kenya 

 Research  institutions  should  pursue
targeted  studies  to  enhance  our
understanding  and  quantification  of
health  effects  of  air  pollution  in  Kenya
under changing climate.

Acknowledgements
This  work  was  in  part  supported  by  the
University  of  Nairobi’s  Education  for
Sustainable  Development  in  Africa-
Sustainable  Urban  Development  (ESDA-
SUD)  programme,  a  collaboration  of
University  of  Nairobi  and  United  Nations
University.  We  also  acknowledge  the
MODIS  mission  scientists  and  associated
NASA personnel  for  the production of  the
data used in this research effort..

References
Asian  Coalition  for  Housing  Rights.

(2004). Negotiating the right to stay in the
city.  Environment  and Urbanization,  16(1):
9–26.

Acker,  J.  G.  and G. Leptoukh,  (2007).
Online  Analysis  Enhances  Use  of  NASA
Earth  Science  Data.  Eos,  Trans.  AGU,
88(2) 14 -17.

Muthama,  N.  J.,  (2019a).  Sustainable
Urban Metabolism: The Case of Air Quality
in  the  City  of  Nairobi.  In  Sustainable
Development in Africa Ed. by M. Nagao, J.
Masinja & A. Alhassan, Spears Media Press

Muthama  NJ.  (2019b).  Sub-National
Policy Readiness as Regards the Planet’s
Carrying  Capacity  and  Environmental
Sustainability  in  Kenya.  Journal  of
Sustainability, Environment and Peace 1(1)
6-11

UNEP  (2016)  GEO-6  Regional
Assessment for Africa. UNEP, Kenya.

GoK(2014) Environmental Management
and Coordination (Air-quality)  Regulations,
Government Press

Authors
Prof. Nzioka John Muthama 
(Jmuthama@uonbi.ac.ke)
Wangari  Maathai  Institute  for  Peace  and
Environmental Studies, 
University of Nairobi.

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

50


