
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Context
Spouse abuse (SA) is commonly known
as domestic violence. It is also referred to
as  family  violence,  domestic  disputes,
intimate partner violence, wife abuse, wife
battering, husband battering, and gender-
based  violence.   SA  also  refers  to
violence between intimates living together
or who have previously cohabited. SA is
perpetrated  in  the  form  of  physical,
psychological,  and  verbal  acts  used  to
achieve control over an intimate partner It
characteristically includes acts of physical
and  mental  cruelty  progressing  from  a
slap  or  shove,  to  a  punch or  kick,  and
more extreme manifestations of violence
including  suffocation,  strangulation,
attempted  murder,  and  actual  murder.
The term violence or abuse is often used
in a narrow as well as wider sense. In the
narrow  sense,  it  describes  the  use  or
threat of physical force against the victim,
constituting  the  crime of  assault.  In  the
wider definition within the family context,
it  includes  physical  assault,  sexual  or
psychological  assault,  mental  and
emotional harassment. 

SA  results  in  negative  health
consequences  for  the  victim.  SA  is
acknowledged globally as a major social
problem  that  affects  the  victims,  their
families,  and  the  community  in  general
irrespective  of  the  social,  economic,
religious or cultural group. While there are
no  comprehensive  statistics  for  male
victims of SA,  in Kenya,  44 per cent  of

men  and  45  per  cent  of  women  have
experienced  SA  (KDHS,  2014).  This
indicates  an  increase  in  gender-based
violence  for  both  men  and  women.
Reporting of SA by male victims is low due
to  social  stigma  associated  with  being  a
victim,  negative  attitude  of  the  police
towards  prosecution  of  SA,  and  the
socialization that a male has to be dominant
over the female spouse. As a result, many
male victims of SA do not report the abuse
for  intervention  but  suffer  the
consequences. Despite the above statistics
of the known reported incidences of SA to
the criminal justice system (CJS), research
indicates that the majority of the incidences
go  unreported  while  only  a  smaller
percentage is documented.

The  objective  of  this  policy  brief  is  to
highlight the systemic weakness of the CJS
as  a  response  mechanism  to  SA and  to
make  recommendations  for  policy
interventions that can effectively protect the
family as the basic unit of the society from
the  negative  impact  of  SA.  Unless  the
response mechanism is effective, the family
unit  remains  threatened  as  vulnerable
victims  fail  to  report  SA  for  intervention.
There  is  an  urgent  need  for  an  effective
intervention mechanism that can resolve SA
and protect the family.

Approach and Results
A study was conducted in Nairobi in 2015
on  the  effectiveness  of  the  CJS  in
protecting  the  family  against  SA.  As  the
capital city, Nairobi is representative of the

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Gender, Youth and Vulnerable Groups 

The Response of the Criminal Justice 
System to Spouse Abuse in Kenya
Dr Scholastica A. Omondi

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

19

The existence of the family as
the basic unit of society is
threatened by spouse 
abuse (SA)

The criminal justice system is 
ineffective and not 
suitable for resolving SA 
cases.

The impact of SA on family 
members negatively 
affects their ability to 
contribute towards 
national development at 
their maximum

There is need for SA 
prevention policy and an 
alternative dispute 
resolution mechanism.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

population of the country. Respondents and
key  informants  were  purposively  sampled
based on their report to the CJS and their
role  in  handling  SA victims,  respectively.
The  majority  of  the  respondents  (80  per
cent)  of  the respondents  were categorical
that  the  CJS’  approach  of  arresting  the
perpetrator, prosecuting him/her under the
adversarial  trial  procedure  was
counterproductive  to  their  main  aim  of
resolution  of  the  abuse.  The  major
weaknesses of the CJS in resolving SA are:

 the adversarial nature of the CJS.

 lack  of  a  specific  crime  known  as
spouse abuse.

 lack of a mandatory reporting policy.

 lack of a no-drop policy

 strict  rules  of  evidence  that  fail  to
take into account the vulnerability of
SA victims

 the bureaucracy and formality asso-
ciated with the trial process

These  identified  weaknesses  need  to  be
addressed if the CJS is to respond to SA
effectively  and  protect  the  family  as  the
basic unit of society. The government has a
constitutional obligation under Article 45(1)
of the Constitution to protect the family.
The study  concluded that  the  CJS is  not
effective in resolving SA. This means that
more  cases  of  SA are  not  reported.  The
implication is that many victims of SA suffer
the  consequences  of  unresolved  SA
silently, in some cases leading to homicides
or suicides. SA, therefore, remains a threat
to  the  family  unit.  Those  affected  by  SA
cannot contribute to nation-building to their
maximum potential due to the effect of SA

on their performance. There is a need for
an  alternative  suitable  and  effective
dispute  resolution  mechanism  that
addresses  SA  while  preserving  and
protecting  the  family  unit.  Although  the
CJS  is  perceived  to  deter  potential
offenders  from  committing  crimes,  it  is
ineffective  in  resolving  SA.  The
prosecution  of  a  spouse  in  SA  cases
tears the family apart and perpetuates the
already strained marital relationship. The
CJS  should  be  preserved  for  specific
cases  that  deserve  prosecution  and
punishment of the offending spouse.

Policy 
Recommendations
The measures in Box 1 are thematically
interconnected  to  promote  oral  health
through  disease  prevention,  reduce  the
need  for  restorations  and  encouraging
best  practice  in  the  handling  of  dental
amalgam waste.

Short-Term 
 Train  and  maintain  a  register  of

multidisciplinary  professionals  who
can  be  called  upon  to  resolve  SA
cases to protect the family

 Develop a policy on the preservation
and  protection  of  the  family  as  the
basic unit  of  society.  The aim should
be to prevent SA, but where it occurs,
resolve it and protect the family.

 Develop  policies  that  would  require
mandatory reporting of SA, mandatory
prosecution  of  reported  cases  that
persist despite attempts to resolve the
abuse, and a no-drop policy

Medium-Term
 Operationalize  Article  159  of  the

Constitution  and  enhance  the  capacity
of existing alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms to address SA.

 Amend the Protection Against Domestic
Violence Act No. 2 of 2015 to create an
offence  known  as  Spouse  Abuse  and
provide for the penalty.

 Where  the  violence  persists  despite
attempts to resolve the same, prosecute
the offending spouse.

Acknowledgements
I  acknowledge  the  input  of  the  following:  Prof.
Wilson  Otengah  and  Dr  Daniel  Muia  who
supervised the thesis that produced the findings
which inform this  policy  brief.  Thanks to  all  the
staff  and  postgraduate  students  of  Kenyatta
University Sociology Department

References
Bennet  C.L.,  Goodman  L.,  (2015),  what  is

Empowerment  anyway?  A  Model  for  Domestic
Violence  Practice,  Research  and  Evaluation,
Psychology  of  Violence  American  Psychological
Association 5(1).

GVRC Profile. (2011). GVRC
Kenya  Demographic  Health  Survey  (2014

KDHS)

Authors
Dr Scholastica A. Omondi 
(somondi@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department-Public Law, School of Law, University
of Nairobi Kisumu Campus, P.O Box 19134-40123
Kisumu, Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

20


