
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Roadside vendors and motorcycle taxis
(Photo: Madara Ogot)

Context
Kenya’s  credit  market  has  gone  a  full
circle  in  just  about  three  years.  Before
2016,  interest  rates  were  to  a  large
extend liberalized,  and relatively  high  to
the  frustration  of  policymakers.  High
interest rates are an obstacle to domestic
investments while at the same time they
contribute to bank profitability.   The fact
that  banks  were  very  profitable  in  the
context  of  household  and  individual  in-
debtness with low returns on savings was
perceived as unethical and unacceptable.
A group  of  lawmakers  moved  a  motion
that  was  unanimously  passed  in
parliament  in  2016  to  introduce  interest
rate  controls2.  The  objective  of  the
interest  rate  controls  was to reduce the
cost of credit, increase or expand access
to credit  while  increasing the returns on
savings. However, there is evidence that
"the law on interest rate controls obtained
the opposite effect. Specifically, it led to a
collapse  of  credit  to  micro,  small,  and
medium enterprises, as well as individual
credit;  shrinking of the loan book of  the
small  banks;  and  reduced  financial
intermediation”  (Alper  et  al.  2019  p.1).
Three years down the line in 2019 the law
that provided for interest rate controls was
repealed. 

The real problem with interest rate controls
was the inability for banks to price for risk.
As such, government bonds became more
attractive  to  financial  institutions  as
opposed  to  lending  to  micro  and  small
enterprises which were perceived as risky
despite  their  crucial  role  in  employment
creation,  investments  and  economic
growth.  The  interest  rate  controls,
therefore, created a vacuum where the so-
called risky borrowers (firms and individuals
alike)  had  to  look  for  other  avenues  to
access to credit.  This policy brief is critical
especially in the wake of the 2019 financial
access  survey  that  showed  that  the
percentage of people with access to credit
services was at 82.9 per cent, up from 26.7
per cent in 2006 and 75.3 per cent in 2016.

The same survey found that financial health
(the  ability  to  cope  with  unexpected
financial demands) was worsening. Much of
the  access  to  credit  is  fuelled  by  a
proliferation of lenders using mobile phone
technology  to give  quick  small  loans  with
terms  that  are  otherwise  unfair  to  the
wellbeing of the borrower. This amounts to
predatory  lending,  a  lending practice  with
unfair or abusive loan terms on a borrower.
It also amounts to a coercive practice that
convinces  a  borrower  to  take a  loan that
they can do without.  In this research, we

Series 1 - Economic Pillar: Financial Services

Taming Predatory Lending for a 
Resilient Financial System and 
Economic Growth
 Dr Joy Kiiru

Pricing for risk by financial 
institutions, and charging 
higher interest rates to more 
risky borrowers is not 
necessarily bad for the 
economy. 

A more competitive formal 
financial system will keep 
bank interest rates low

Tame predatory lending by 
imposing regulations that 
protect poor borrowers

Consider social protection to aid
the very poor and vulnerable.
Credit/loans may cause more
harm to them

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

3



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

focus  on  lending  systems  targeting  the
poor, to give policy recommendations for a 
healthy  and  resilient  credit  system  in
Kenya.

Approach
We used data collected through a survey to
evaluate  sources  and  impact  of  financial
services to poor households.   We utilized
both theoretical and empirical econometric
modelling methods to analyse the data.  

We  focus  on  lending  modalities  for  poor
households  and  entrepreneurs,  in  partic-
ular,  solidarity  lending  and  other  socially
secured loans to demonstrate that the so-
called  "informal  collateral"  ideally  over-
secure loans for  the poor and is the gen-
esis of predatory lending.

Results
We  present  two  main  arguments  derived
from  our  research:  One,  policymakers
should not worry about banks being able to
price  for  risks  and  to  charge  “higher”
interest  rates  to  more  risky  borrowers.
Moreover, if the banking system is compet-
itive, interest rates will remain relatively low.
The  alternative  to  bank  credit  (be  it  for
enterprises or individuals) include informal
money  lenders,  investments  groups
(chamas), and digital mobile app loans. All
these  alternatives  charge  much  higher
interest rates and or impose unfair terms to
the  borrower.  Our  second  argument
demonstrates that  in  the Kenyan context,
characterized  by  relatively  high  poverty
levels and income inequalities, the demand
for  credit  (both  households  and  firms)  is
ripe. Poor people or enterprises seek credit
as a matter of survival and easily discount
or under-rate the real cost of credit. Their
situation  pre-disposes  them  to  predatory
lenders. Thus there is the need to regulate
credit  markets  to  ensure  that  access  to
credit not only adds to economic growth but
also resilient financial systems. 

Our study revealed that 10 per cent of the
sample  used  at  least  75  per  cent  of  the
loans  for  immediate  consumption  needs,
another 57 per cent used at least 75 per
cent  of  their  loans  for  productive  activity
and only 33 per cent used the entire credit
for  productive  activity.  Loan  repayments
consisted of  stringent  regulations  by  both
borrowers  and  microfinance  institutions.
For example, there were weekly meetings
to collect  all  due loans,  make loan instal-
ments and mitigate imminent default by any
group  member.  The  loan  officer  would

preside over the meetings and would not
adjourn till  all due loan instalments have
been  redeemed.  In  case  of  imminent
threat of default for any outstanding loan
instalment,  the  group  officials  were
responsible.  They  carry  out  immediate
fundraising  including  borrowing  from
informal  money  lenders  just  to  redeem
the group but with consequences to the
defaulting  member.  Sanctions  to  the
defaulter include threats, penalties, social
stigma  and  alienation.   Confiscation  of
private  property  was  also  rampant.
However,  its  group  members  who
confiscate each other's  property in case
of  default.  Repayment  rates  by  joint
liability  groups  stood  well  over  90  per
cent.  The poor are therefore trapped in a
situation where default would lead to both
economic  and  social  costs.   In  our
sample,  only  about  20  per  cent  of  the
respondents repaid their loan instalments
through returns from their enterprises, the
rest  of  the  sample  experienced distress
repayments. Distress repayments include
borrowing to repay (62 per cent), sale of
pre-existing  property  (17  per  cent)  and
actual confiscation of private property by
group members (4 per cent).

Another important finding from our study
is  that  the  so-called  better-off  poor  (not
the  poorest)  are  in  a  better  position  to
benefit  from small  loans  as  long as  the
loans  jump-start  them  into  productive
activities  within  their  areas  of  expertise.
Finally,  the  very  poor  are  too  poor  to
benefit  from  market-driven  interventions
like microcredit. What the very poor need
are  non-market  interventions  like  social
protection  services  as  a  matter  of
survival.  Access  to  credit  will  not
necessarily  turn  a  poor  person  into  an
entrepreneur  and  hence the  need  for  a
realistic  policy  on  access  to  credit  and
entrepreneurship  to  ensure  that  only
viable enterprises or  households access
credit.  The  implication  is  far-reaching
especially  to  mobile  phone  app-based
lending that preys on the youth and other
vulnerable persons.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Regulations that encourage the viable

selection  of  households  and
entrepreneurs into solidarity borrowing
groups  should  be  encouraged.  For

example,  outlawing  informal  contracts
that allow group members to confiscate
defaulters' private property.

 Financial resources even though held as
security for loans advanced to solidarity
groups,  should  be  held  in  interest-
bearing  accounts,  unlike  the  current
scenario where such accounts bear no
interest. “Forced savings" are part of the
reason  why  poor  people's  loans  are
over-secured  and  should  be
discouraged or made to work for them. 

 Consider  social  protection  for  the  very
poor, as they may benefit from market-
driven interventions like credit.

Medium-Term
 Banking  regulations  should  ensure  a

competitive banking system to keep in-
terest rates low.

 Regulate  digital  lending  to  create  a
stable and resilient banking system.

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  derived  from  the  research
paper:  Kiiru,  Joy  (2018):  Institutional  Moral
Hazard and Inclusive Finance: When Good is Not
so  Good.  OIDA  International  Journal  of
Sustainable  Development,  Ontario  International
Development  Agency,  Canada  ISSN 1923-6654
(print) ISSN 1923-6662 (online). 

The  research  was  generously  funded  by  the
Federal  Ministry  of  Economic  Cooperation  and
Development BMZ – Germany.

References
Alper,  C.  Emre;  Benedict,  Clements,  Niko

Hobdari,  and  Rafel  Moya  Porcel  (2019)  “Do
Interest  Rate  Controls  Work?  Evidence  from
Kenya.” IMF working paper WP/19/119.

Central  Bank  of  Kenya.,  Kenya  National
Bureau  of  Statistics,  and  Financial  Deepening
Trust- Kenya (2019)  2019 Finaccess Household
Survey,  Access,  Usage,  Quality. Available  on
https://www.centralbank.go.ke/uploads/financial_i
nclusion/1035460079_2019%20FinAcces
%20Report%20(web).pdf  Date  accessed  15th
August 2019 

Kiiru,  Joy (2018) “Institutional  Moral  Hazard
and  Inclusive  Finance:  When  Good  is  Not  so
Good.” OIDA International Journal of Sustainable
Development,  Ontario International Development
Agency, Canada.

Kiiru, J. (2007) “Microfinance: Getting Money
to  the  Poor  or  Making  Money  out  of  Poverty?
What was the Promise?”  International Journal of
Finance and the Common Good.  Special Issue
September 2007.

Author
Dr Joy M. Kiiru (jmueni@uonbi.ac.ke )
School of Economics, University of Nairobi, P.O.
Box 30197-00100,  Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

4


