
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
Lending to the agricultural sector in

Kenya is low. According to a report by the
Kenya Bankers  Association  (KBA),  only
four  percent  of  commercial  banks’
lending  goes  into  agriculture  (KBA,
2018).  Most  of  these loans  go to large
farmers  as  smallholder  farmers  are
unable  to  meet  banks’ requirements  as
well  as  the  stringent  repayment  terms
demanded by  banks.  Thus,  smallholder
farmers have to rely on other sources of
finance  for  farm  financing.  As  Kenya
seeks to achieve the food security goal
as  enshrined  in  Vision  2030,  it  is
increasingly  important  to  finance
smallholder farmers in order to improve
agricultural  production  and  productivity
and transform the rural economies.

Given  that  farmers  do  not  have
regular  incomes,  making  regular
repayments from agriculture is untenable.
Some  lenders,  especially  microfinance
lenders,  have  designed  loan  products
that  offer  farmers  some  flexibility  in
repayment.   Such loans  mostly  contain
features  such  as  grace  periods  and
flexible  repayment  schedules.  Other
features include bullet/balloon payments,
loan refinancing, loan rescheduling, and
credit lines. Flexible loans are expected
to be attractive to farmers given that they
usually match the cash flows of farmers.
Thus,  access  to  credit  is  expected  to
improve  when  loan  products  are
designed  with  flexible  terms.  This  has
been  a  subject  of  debate  among
scholars. 

There  are  conflicting  results  on
whether flexible loans improve access to
credit for smallholder farmers (see Weber
& Musshoff,  2013 and McIntosh, 2008).
This may be due to the differences in the
measurement of flexible loans. Previous
studies  have  used  single  indicators  of
flexible loans where only one aspect  of
flexibility  is  examined.  However,  it  is

possible for  a single loan product to have
more than one element of flexibility (Labie
et al., 2017). Thus, loan products may differ
in their levels of flexibility. Previous studies
have  failed  to  model  flexibility  in  this
manner.  This  policy  brief  discusses  the
extent to which loans offered to smallholder
farmers  are  flexible  as  well  as  whether
credit access increases with the increase in
the level of loan flexibility. The paper then
discusses  the  implications  of  results  for
practice and policy. 

Approach and Results
This  policy  brief  summarises  the

study by Odhiambo (2019)  who examined
the influence of flexible loans on access to
credit  among  smallholder  farmers.  The
study  collected  primary  survey  data  from
103  farmers  who  had  borrowed  from
lending institutions in Ugenya Sub-county of
Siaya County.  The sub-county  has  a  high
concentration  of  financial  institutions  that
offer  flexible loans to smallholder  farmers.
The study used a simple random sampling
method to select respondents from a list of
members  in  farmer  groups  and  individual
borrowers. 

The  results  indicate  that  the  loans
products  offered  to  farmers  were
moderately  flexible.  With  the  flexible  loan
index  ranging  from  0  (low  flexibility)  to  1
(high flexibility), the study showed that the
index  had  a  value  of  0.42  (moderate
flexibility). Descriptive analysis showed that
the most common flexibility features in the
loans  offered  were  grace  periods  and
flexible  repayment  schedules  (see  Figure
1). 

As  shown,  all  farmers  reported  that
the  loan  products  had  flexible  repayment
schedules and, therefore, they were allowed
to make loan repayments  at  intervals that
they  chose.  Further,  98%  of  the  farmers
reported being given grace periods before
they began loan repayments. About a third
(35%) of farmers agreed that they could be

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Financial Services

Using Flexible Loans to Improve 
Access to Credit for Farmers in Kenya
 Fredrick Onyango Odhiambo and Dr Radha Upadhyaya

Lenders are designing loan 
products with flexible terms 
to respond to the unique 
needs of farmers in a bid to 
improve access to credit. 

However, these products are 
moderately flexible thus are 
not improving access to 
credit for farmers as 
envisaged. 

Lenders should redesign loan 
products to make them more
flexible by providing flexible 
options such as bullet 
payments and credit lines. 

Lenders should also educate 
farmers on full product 
features to increase their 
financial literacy in order to 
improve their agency. 

Government should provide 
credit guarantee schemes  
for institutions that lend to 
farmers to encourage the 
lenders to design more 
flexible loan products. 

Key Messages

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

67

Figure 1 – Percent of Farmers with Various Flexible Loan Features



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

refinanced in cases where their crops were
affected by some shocks such as flood or
draught.  Only  a handful  of  farmers (13%)
said their  terms of loans allowed them to
make  bullet  payments.  The  results  also
show  that  few  farmers  agreed  that  they
would  access  a  credit  line  (3%)  or  their
loans be rescheduled (3%) in case of any
shocks that affected their farm output. 

However,  these  were  rarely
exercised  by  borrowers,  especially  those
that were in farmer groups. This is because
the  borrowers  were  pressured  by  their
fellow group members to repay their loans
quickly  in  order  to  improve  the  group’s
overall  credit  rating.  Lenders  provided
incentives  to  groups  for  paying  up  their
loans more regularly and for finishing their
loan  repayments  earlier  than  scheduled.
Because groups competed to get rewards
for  having  maintained  clean  records  and
repaying their loans earlier,  the incentives
pushed  borrowers  to  repay  their  loans
regularly  and  complete  their  repayments
before the loan period expired.   

The  bivariate  results  showed  that
access  to  credit  differed  across  sex,
education, type of credit, and wealth status
of  households.  Access  to  credit  also
differed  across  three  features  of  flexible
loans  namely  bullet  payments,  loan
refinancing and loan rescheduling. 

On  whether  flexible  loans  influence
credit  access,  the  results  showed  that
flexibility had no influence on the amount of
loan farmers borrowed. The main drivers of
access  to  credit  were  the  type  of  loan,
education  level  of  the  farmer,  and  the
household wealth. More specifically, higher
credit  access  was  associated  with  higher
levels of  education, wealthier  households,
and  provision  of  cash-based  loans  as
opposed to asset-based loans.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 Lenders  should  re-design  their  flexible
loan  products  to  improve  the  level  of

flexibility  by introducing more flexible
loan  options.  More  options  such  as
credit  lines  and  bullet  payments
should be included within the portfolio
of flexible loan features. 

 Lenders should also educate farmers
on  all  the  features  of  loan  products
available  to  them  to  improve  the
financial  literacy  and,  therefore,  their
agency.  Farmers  are  most  likely
unaware of their choices because the
loan  officers  do  not  educate  them
more about their options. 

 Farmers should be offered more cash
loans  instead  of  in-kind  credit  to
improve access to credit. Lenders who
offer  in-kind  credit  argue  that  the
fungibility  of  cash  explains  the
provision of farm inputs. However, the
results  showed  that  offering  in-kind
credit  was  associated  with  lower
access to credit.  

 Lenders should also improve the loan
administration and allow borrowers to
exercise  the  rights  within  the  loan
contracts such as allowing borrowers
a grace period before they begin loan
repayments or allowing them to make
repayments  at  time  intervals  of  their
choosing.

Medium-Term
 Provide  Credit  Guarantee  Scheme:

Lenders  consider  agriculture  a  risky
sector.  Smallholder farmers are even
considered  riskier.  In  order  to
incentivise  lending  institutions  to
provide  more  credit  to  smallholder
farmers, the government can provide
credit  guarantee  schemes.  This  will
act as a way to de-risk lenders from
any loan defaults.

 Disburse  credit  through  lenders:
Smallholder farmers are more likely to
be  credit-rationed  when  the  loan
product  is  highly  flexible.  Thus,  the
government  can  provide  more  funds
to  the  farmers  through  lenders  that
offer  flexible  loan  products.  This  will
encourage  more  lenders  to  offer

highly  flexible  loans  and  limit  credit
rationing. 

Acknowledgements
This  brief  is  derived  from  a  Master  of
Development  Studies  thesis  by  Fredrick
Onyango Odhiambo and supervised by Dr
Radha  Upadhyaya.  We  acknowledge  the
farmers  who took  part  in  this  survey.  We
also  thank  the  students  and  faculty
members of  the  Institute  for  Development
Studies for their valuable comments during
the development of the original thesis. 

References
KBA  (Kenya  Bankers  Association).

(2018).  Realisation  of  Full  Potential  of
Agriculture Sector: Is Commercial Financing
a  Core  Missing  Cog?  Nairobi:  Kenya
Bankers Association.

Labie,  M.,  Laureti,  C.,  &  Szafarz,  A.
(2017).  Discipline  and  Flexibility:  a
Behavioural  Perspective  on  Microfinance
Product  Design.  Oxford  Development
Studies, 45(3), 321-337.

McIntosh,  C.  (2008).  Estimating
Treatment  Effects  from  Spatial  Policy
Experiments:  an  Application  to  Ugandan
Microfinance.  The  Review  of  Economics
and Statistics, 90(1), 15-28.

Odhiambo, F. O. (2019). Flexible Loans
and  Access  to  Agricultural  Credit  for
Smallholder  Farmers  in  Siaya  County,
Kenya. Nairobi: University of Nairobi.

Weber, R., & Musshoff, O. (2013). Can
Flexible Microfinance Loans Improve Credit
Access  for  Farmers?  Agricultural  Finance
Review, 73(2), 255-271.

Authors
Fredrick Onyango Odhiambo, 
ombako82@gmail.com 
ResearchPro Solutions,
P.O. Box 102609-00101, Nairobi, Kenya.
Dr Radha Upadhyaya
radha@njora.com 
Institute for Development Studies, 
University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journals/

68


