
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Source: Author

Context
Plastic waste is one of Nairobi’s and to a
greater  extent  Kenya’s  most  visible
environmental problems, with most of the
flooding witnessed in cities  attributed to
plastic  waste  that  clogs  drainage
systems,  key  among  them  are  plastic
carrier bags.  These are lightweight non-
biodegradable materials that take ages to
decompose.  They  reduce  the  aesthetic
value  of  both  the  natural  and  physical
environment  and  have  since  proven  to
have  negative  impacts  on  marine  life,
livestock  and  human  beings.  It  is
estimated that  in  their  lifetime,  livestock
ingest an average of 2.5 kgs of plastics
and this has been attributed to losses in
the meat industry.  

UNEP  (2018)  reports  that  between
60% to  80% of  waste  in  the  oceans  is
made of plastics. Also, about 275 metric
tonnes  of  waste  generated  across  192
coastal  countries  is  made  of  plastics.
Plastic  waste  generated  continued  to
significantly  increase.  In  2015,  it  is
estimated  that  300  million  tonnes  of
plastic  waste  were  generated.  These
worrying statistics have got the attention
of  most  governments.  According  to
UNEP, at least 60 nations have banned
single-use  plastics  while  others  have
employed measures that include market-
based approaches (levies/tax) and public-
private  agreements  to  help  reduce  the
consumption  of  the  material.  In  these
nations, 50% of them have little to report

since  most  of  them  enforced  the  ban
recently and there is poor enforcement.

Kenya  introduced  the  ban  through
Gazette  notice  No.  2356  in  2017.  At  the
time of introduction, about 1 million plastic
bags  were  consumed  annually  in
supermarkets  alone.  Nairobi  City  County
generates over 2,400 tonnes of waste daily
and has alluded to their inability to manage
the waste which mostly consists of food and
plastics.   Half  the  waste  goes  to  the
Dandora  dumpsite  while  the  remaining
waste  is  either  illegally  dumped  or  left
uncollected.
Nations  must  strive  to  produce  and
consume  sustainably  in  an  environment
that  is  clean  and  healthy.  Governance
effectiveness is measured when regulatory
systems can meet policy needs. More than
two years  after  the  ban  in  Kenya,  plastic
carrier bags are still in circulation..

Study Approach and 
Results
A cross-sectional study was employed with
surveys  of  a  sample  of  106  small  scale
traders  (butchers,  grocers,  vendors  and
retailers) in Karen and Kibera most affected
by  the  ban.  The  aim  was  to  get  a
comparative  overview  of  how  compliance
with  the  ban  was  taking  shape  one  year
after it took effect.

The response of stakeholders towards a
given piece  of  legislation  determines  how
effective  the  legislation  will  be  complied
with.  In  Kibera,  57%  of  the  traders
responded that the ban was not necessary

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Revisiting Kenya’s Ban on Plastic 
Carrier Bags
 Elmah O. Geoffrey and Dr Jane M. Mutune

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

33

Revitalize the sisal and cotton 
industry to provide eco-
friendly alternatives and 
create employment.

NEMA should provide sound 
waste management strategies 
that promote a circular model 
of economy which encourages 
waste recovery.

Reduction/removal of taxes on all
imports that are aimed at 
providing healthy and eco-
friendly alternatives to the 
plastics.

Integrate public awareness and 
sensitization sustainable and 
responsibly consumption 
through environmental 
education in national and 
county development plans. 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

and 30% in Karen. However, a majority of
respondents  (44%)  from  Karen  were
conflicting,  responding  yes  and  no.  They
acknowledged  the  benefit  as  their
environment  becomes  clean  day  by  day,
but they were also making huge losses due
to lack of better alternatives.

A majority of Kibera traders report that
apart from the business being difficult, the
physical  environment  is  still  dirty  despite
the ban being intended to make it cleaner.
At  least  60%  of  traders  interviewed
lamented  that  there  were  no  clear
alternatives and so the ban should not have
taken effect in the first place. The lack of
clear  alternatives  to  the  banned  plastic
bags has proven to be a threat to nations
that have banned plastic bags in the quest
to achieve full compliance. 

This study established that 70% of the
respondents were not personally consulted
before the ban took effect.  The 30% that
were  consulted  indicated  that  they  heard
about the ban through television and radio.
Also,  there  no  forum  was  called  to  brief
them  on  the  ban.  Half  of  the  traders
reported that they are not aware of which
plastics were banned and so the difficulty in
complying with the ban.  

As  some  traders  switched  to  other
businesses,  others  looked  for  ways  to
access the banned plastics through porous
borders from neighbouring countries.
“What  surprise  me  is  that  they  banned
plastic in Kenya but we’re being sold to the
banned plastics  from Uganda,  so  it’s  like
we’re building the economy of Uganda than
our own” – lamented a trader from Makina. 
A study was done in Ireland (Anastasio and
Nix,  2016)  established  that  while  Ireland
was introducing a levy on plastic bags, they
omitted small bags used in separating fresh
produce  such  as  meat,  fruits  and
vegetables  as  a  result  of  a  public  outcry
from the butchers. 

A vendor in Kibera points out that since
she does not want to lose customers, she
ensures the customer is satisfied, 
“If my customer comes with a container, I
serve them the goods they want in them,
however,  if  he or  she does not have and
since I do not want to lose money, I use the
banned plastic bags.”
Available  Alternatives  and  their  Health
Implications 

The  right  to  clean  and  healthy
environment  in  which  the  Gazette  Notice
No. 2356 was hinged talks about the safety

of  the  environment  and  human  beings.
The lack of affordable, healthy and eco-
friendly  alternatives  to  the  plastic  bags
has  since  proven  to  be  a  threat  in  the
quest to eliminate plastics. Traders report
that  since  the  plastic  carrier  bags  ban
took  effect,  it  has  not  been easy  doing
business. The blame is put on the lack of
suitable  alternatives  to  banned  plastic
bags.  The  non-woven  reusable  bags
seem  to  be  the  typical  alternatives,
however, they could pose greater health
risks by exposing consumers to bacteria if
not cleaned. Used newspapers and other
paper materials used in packaging could
also  expose  consumers  to  dangerous
chemicals detrimental to human health. 
Conclusions

Kenya's ban on plastic carrier bags is
one of the greatest things to happen in a
developing  nation  with  the  desire  to
ensure  environmental  sustainability.  Not
only  has  it  tamed  the  habits  of
consumers, but has also proven to be a
step forward in ensuring that  there is a
clean  and  healthy  environment  as
provided  for  by  Article  42  of  the
Constitution  2010.  This  study  finds  that
the ban was not necessary: the problem
of  plastic  waste  is  human-made  and
hence the solution lies with humans and
not  the  plastics.  Nations  that  have
embraced recycling and invested heavily
in  ensuring  a  sustainable  environment
consume fewer plastics and can manage
the plastics they do use.

There was a difference in compliance
between Karen and Kibera traders (60%
and  30%,  respectively).  Compliance  to
plastic  ban  had  picked  up  slowly
occasioned by limited sensitization of the
public  on  the  ban,  therefore  public
involvement  is an important  prerequisite
for a successful implementation. .

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Removal  of  taxes on all  imports  that

are  meant  to  provide  affordable  and
healthy  alternatives  to  traders  and
consumers.

  There is a need for  a robust  public
awareness  and  sensitization  of
sustainable  and  responsible

consumption.  For  example,  environ-
mental  education should be introduced
in the school curriculum.

 Increasing  environmental  communi-
cation  in  media  platforms,  industries,
offices  and  along  the  streets  geared
towards  conservation,  for  example,
using billboards.

 Encouraging  citizens  and  stakeholders
to  adopt  streets  and  roads,  taking
responsibility for their cleanliness.

Medium-Term
 Allocation of funding to recycling sector

where  all  used  plastics  could  be
recycled  to  prevent  them  from  getting
into the environment

 Provision of  sound waste management
strategies  by  NEMA  that  will
communicate  waste  recovery  to  the
stakeholders 

 Reviving the sisal and cotton industry as
a way of  providing healthy alternatives
and  offer  jobs  as  part  of  the
government’s Big Four Agenda

 Introduce weekly clean-ups where a day
is  selected  within  the  week  and  the
business closes from 6 am to 9 am for
cleaning  purposes  before  operations
resume. 

Acknowledgements
This policy brief has been derived from the
work carried out by the author as part of his
Master  of  Science  in  Environmental
Governance  Thesis.  I  would  like  to
acknowledge  Dr  Jane  M.  Mutune  for  the
supervision  of  this  work  and  tireless
commitment to see this through.

References
Anastasio, M., & Nix, J. (2016).  Plastic

Bag Levy in Ireland. 
UNEP. (2018).  Report on the Status of

Styrofoam  and  Plastic  Bag  Bans  in  the
Wider Caribbean Region. (July).

Authors
Elmah O. Geoffrey 
(oelmah01@gmail.com)
Dr Jane M. Mutune 
(mutheumutune22@gmail.com)
Wangari  Maathai  Institute  for  Peace  and
Environmental Studies, 
University of Nairobi

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

34


