
Background
South  Africa  is  ranked  the  top

innovating  mainland  country  on  the
African  continent  in  the  2022  Global
Innovation  Index  (GII)  (WIPO,  2023)  It
has the second highest level of funding
towards  research  and  development  on
the  continent  (currently  at  62%  behind
Kenya  at  69%  of  GDP)  (World  Bank,
2022) with over 50% of the R&D funds
coming from the government as opposed
to foreign actors as in many other African
countries. The private sector contributes
around 23% of R&D spend (DSI, 2023). 

The country has a vibrant start-up
culture and a strong history of support for
new  market  entrants  through  venture
capital.  One of  the reasons the country
ranks so highly in the GII is because it
has three of the top ten highest valued
venture  capital  (VC)  deals  on  the
continent in 2021. 

A significant number of VC deals in
South Africa in recent years have taken
place in the FinTech space. For example,
JUMO,  a  South  African-based  FinTech
firm,  raised  US$  120  million  in  2021
following a  successful  round of  funding
that  raised  US$  55  million  the  year
before (Kene-Okafor, 2021). 

JUMO  uses  artificial  intelligence
(AI)  to  power  its  ‘banking-as-a-service’
platform. AI is one of a suite of emerging
digital  technologies  (EDTs)  that  are
starting to transform the innovation space
on  the  African  continent.  Other  EDTs
include  blockchain,  geographic
information  systems  (GIS),  internet-of-
things  (IoT),  and  new-generation  data
analytics.  We  term  these  new  data
analytics tools collectively as X-data. This
encompasses big data, open data, user-
generated data, and real-time data.

As more and more companies start
to  embrace these EDTs,  the  innovation
ecosystem  or  facilitatory  environment
needs to be ready to support them. This
is important if South Africa is to achieve
its  national  development  goals  and
remain a leading economic light  on the
African continent. 

This policy brief outlines the results
of  a  study  into  the  status  of  the  EDT
innovation ecosystem in South Africa. It
is part of a comparative study reviewing
the  status  of  the  EDT  innovation
ecosystems in South Africa and Kenya.
The policy brief findings are of value to
those  working  in  the  EDT  innovation
ecosystem,  especially  those  providing
policy support in the areas of education,
regulation and finance. 

Methoodology
An  in-depth  literature  review  and  a

review  of  the  policy  and  regulatory
environment  were  carried  out.  This  was
followed  by  a  survey  of  stakeholders
working in the EDT space in South Africa.
From  the  gathered  information,  an
assessment  of  the  maturity  of  the  EDT
ecosystem in South Africa was performed,
and  policy  recommendations  were  made.
The literature review followed a multi-vocal
systematic  approach  (Ogawa  and  Malen,
1991;  Garousi,  Felderer,  and  Mantyla,
2016)  of  both  peer-reviewed  academic
articles  and  grey  literature  covering  the
development  and  use  of  EDTs  in  South
Africa.   The  grey  literature  reviewed
focussed  on  reports,  trade  journals  and
technical articles, books and book chapters.
Academic  literature  was  reviewed  using
Google Scholar and Scopus using a range
of  relevant  keywords  and  their
combinations.  This  study  builds  on  the
results  of  an  early  report  that  looked  at
emerging technologies in South Africa more
broadly (UJ-TRCTI, 2022).

Maturity  or  development  stage
models  of  an  ecosystem provide  tools  for
assessment  of  where  an  ecosystem  or
facilitatory  environment  is  in  its  life  cycle.
These  models  enable  the  provision  of
insights into the current levels of recognised
success  factors  essential  for  the  maturity,
health, and sustainability of the ecosystem.
The  EDT  ecosystem  maturity  model,
developed by Ogot et al. (2023) was used
for  this  study.  It  is  based  on  the  five
fundamental  activities  of  the  innovation
processes  framework  (Liu  and  White,
2001):  education,  research  (basic,
developmental,  engineering),  implemen-
tation  (manufacturing,  deployment),  end-
use (customers of the product or process),
linkages (bringing together  complementary
knowledge)  and  secondary  actors  (those
providing relevant support  functions to the
main actors in the education, research and
implementation space). 

The  emerging  technologies  maturity
model defines three developmental stages.
The  ideation  stage  is  beyond  basic
research,  testing  fundamental  principles
and is characterised by R&D activities with
pilots  and  proof-of-concepts  performed on
potential  commercial  applications.  The
nascent  stage  embodies  the  early
development  and  formation  of  the
ecosystem. Finally, in the growth stage, the
commercial  applications  of  the  technology
start  gaining  strong  acceptance  in  the
market  with  increased  demand  and  new

Enhancing South Africa’s Emerging 
Digital Technologies’ Innovation 
Ecosystem
Prof. Rebecca Hanlin and Wandile Kelly Mlilo

©2023 Authors 1

South Africa is a rising 
powerhouse of research, 
innovation and use of 
emerging digital 
technologies, including 
artificial intelligence (AI), 
blockchain, geographic 
information systems (GIS), 
internet-of-things (IoT), and 
new-generation data 
analytics.

South Africa is at the growth 
stage of its emerging digital 
technology (EDT) innovation 
ecosystem with a growing 
set of dedicated education 
programmes, an expanding 
research and innovation 
environment and a vibrant 
private sector utilising these 
technologies. 

To ensure movement from 
growth to maturity of the 
EDT ecosystem, South 
African policymakers need to
intensify efforts to bridge the 
skills and capabilities gaps 
through more advertising of 
existing education and 
training opportunities and 
increased dedicated EDT-
related funding programmes.
The continued movement 
towards an agile regulatory 
environment and stronger 
engagement with recognition
of the needs of different, end
users are also required. 

Key Messages



entrants;  and  the  ecosystem  governance
structures are becoming clearer. 

Results
The study found that South Africa is

squarely at the  Growth stage  of the EDT
innovation  ecosystem  maturity  model.  It
has  a  growing  education  sector  in  this

space, a relatively mature research and
implementation  space,  and  a  strong
range  of  stakeholders  involved  and
providing a facilitatory environment. That
said, the technologies are still emerging,
and  there  is  no  evidence  of  their
embeddedness  yet  within  the  economy
and society. This results from a skills and

finance  gap  together  with  an  inadequate
acknowledgement  of  the  needs  and
requirements of different types of end users.
Moves towards  more  facilitatory  and agile
regulation  must  continue  together  with  a
stronger focus on skills training, especially
outside  of  the  university  system.  Further
details are provided in Table 1. 

Table 1: Maturity of the different stages in the EDTs ecosystem

Fundamental 
Activities / Stage

Remarks

Education
Growth

 More than 10 universities offer post-graduate programmes in AI and data analytics-related subjects.
 Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) institutions and Sector Education Training Authorities (SETAs) are embracing 

technology programmes focusing on the Fourth Industrial Revolution or 4IR. The school-age education curriculum now has coding and 
robotics included in them.

 There are, however, still skills gaps and concerns about the employability of graduates.

Research
Growth

 AI and X-data research is taking place in multiple sectors.
 Several collaborative research centres exist. Some have been set up since 2011 while others where set up after the publication of the 

South African Presidential Commission on the 4IR (PC4IR) reported in 2019.
 Four research chairs on AI and related areas are being funded by the South African government.
 South Africa has more patents and publications than any other African country, but the numbers are still low in comparison to other 

emerging economies in the Global South.
 Challenges facing researchers and innovators relate to access to big data sets, keeping up with the rapid developments in the sector 

and funding.

End use
Growth

 The country has higher than average African internet penetration rates at 72% and significantly higher than the global average for 
hours connected to the internet per day.

 Challenges affecting some end-users include infrastructure inadequacies associated with Wi-Fi coverage and highly expensive data. 
This is further complicated by a lack of adequate equipment that accommodates the amount of data received or produced.

 Some users have negative perceptions of EDTs linked to security and privacy concerns limiting the use of opportunities presented by 
EDTs.

 Some issues relate to difficulties and complexities in changing organisational culture to digital options and the fear of disruption to 
existing jobs.

Linkages
Growth

 Increasing numbers of partnerships between researchers and others both inside South Africa and with organisations outside of the 
country.

 Several public-private partnerships exist focusing on EDTs, X-Data and/or related technologies.
 Several industry associations and researcher networks have been set up to coalesce research and practice in AI and data analytics in 

South Africa.
     • High levels of interest in this area of research and innovation have remained since the PC4IR was set up.

Implementation
Growth

 AI and data analytics are used across a range of organisations, especially by the private sector (large and small firms). Government 
agencies also utilise these technologies.

 Multiple sectors use these technologies ranging from insurance and customer services through to health and agriculture.
 Allied government agencies actively support AI and related areas, e.g., through the National Digital Strategy.
 South Africa has traditionally had a top-down government-dominated regulation model but movement towards agile and facilitatory 

governance examples are now visible including anticipatory regulation and outcome-based approaches.
 Funding is available through government but also private firms receiving venture capital support at an early stage, including from some 

South African-based VC firms.

Identified Challenges
(a) There  will  be  a  skills  and capabilities

gap until  the new curriculum changes
take effect

(b) Access to big data sets is limited
(c) Researchers and innovators struggle to

keep  up  with  rapid  technological
developments

(d) Funding  is  better  than  in  other
countries  but  is  still  limited,  including
for infrastructure upkeep

(e) Only a few examples of agile regulation
(f) Limited  interaction  with  users  in  the

innovation ecosystem

Policy 
Recommendations
(a) Intensification of efforts to bridge the

skills and capabilities gaps is needed.
This requires both more advertising of
the existing courses and programmes
that  are  available  now  as  well  as
dedicated funding of scholarships for
these courses and programmes.

(b) Mobilise existing or new networks of
researchers  to  gain  access  to
datasets and enhance training on data
mining/  data  scraping.  In  addition,
increase  networking  between  EDT
researchers  and  those  working  on
Open Science efforts in South Africa. 

(c) The  country’s  National  Research
Foundation (NRF) and others to provide
dedicated  spaces  for  information
sharing. 

(d) The  NRF  and  the  country’s
Technological  Innovation  Agency  (TIA)
need  to  introduce  more  dedicated
funding  streams  for  EDT-related
research and commercialisation efforts.

(e) Build on the efforts already undertaken
to increase the levels of agile regulation.
This  requires  more  information  sharing
and  multi-stakeholder  engagement  as
well as cross-ministry activity. 

(f) Recognise the needs and requirements
of  different  types  of  users  within  the
innovation  ecosystem,  notably  the
difference between professional and end



users.  Set  up  multi-stakeholder
engagement  platforms  dedicated  to
sharing  information  and  networking
opportunities  for  those  working  in
different EDT-related spaces.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by UKAID through
the  Research  and  Innovation  Strength-
ening in Africa (RISA) Fund .

References
DSI.  (2023).  Survey Shows That High

Proportion  Of  R&D Funding  Comes  from
Government.  https://www.dst.gov.za/
index.php/media-room/latest-news/3857-
survey-shows-that-high-proportion-of-r-d-
funding-comes-from-government#:~:text=
The%20government%20sector%20(inclu
ding%20science,main%20beneficiaries
%20of%20government%20funding.
Accessed: 12 August 2023.

Garousi, V., Felderer M., and Mäntylä,
M.  (2016).  ‘The  Need  For  Multivocal

Literature  Reviews  in  Software
Engineering:  Complementing Systematic
Literature Reviews With Grey Literature’,
20th  International  Conference  on
Evaluation and Assessment  in  Software
Engineering,  Limerick,  Ireland, 01-03
June.

Kene-Okafor, T. (2021). Fidelity, Visa
and Kingsway back South African fintech
JUMO  in  $120M  round.  https://tech
crunch.com/2021/11/08/fidelity-visa-and-
kingsway-back-south-african-fintech-
jumo-in-120m-round/.  Accessed:  12
August 2023.

Liu,  X  and  White,  S.,  (2001),
“Comparing  innovation  systems:  a
framework  and  application  to  China’s
transitional context”, Research Policy, 30:
1091-114.

Ogawa, R. T., and Malen, B. (1991),
“Towards  Rigor  in  Review of  Multivocal
Literatures.  Applying  the  Exploratory
Case  Study  Method”,  Review  of
Educational Research, 61, (3): 265-286.

Ogot,  M.  et  al.  (2023)  Emerging
Technologies  in  Kenya  –  A  Landscape
Analysis: Final Report. Nairobi: University of
Nairobi.

The World  Bank,  2022.  Research and
Development  Expenditure  (%  of  GDP)  –
Sub-Saharan Africa. https://data.worldbank.
org/indicator/GB.XPD.RSDV.GD.ZS?
locations=ZG. Accessed: 12 August 2023.

UJ-TRCTI.  (2022).  Emerging  Tech-
nologies  in  South  Africa:  A  Landscape
Analysis. Johannesburg: UJ-TRCTI.

Authors
Prof Rebecca Hanlin
DSI/NRF/Newton Fund Trilateral Research 
Chair in Transformative Innovation, 4IR and 
Sustainable Development
University of Johannesburg
rebeccah@uj.ac.za

Wandile Kelly
University of Johannesburg
wandilem@uj.ac.za

©2023 Authors
Enhancing South Africa’s Emerging Digital Technologies’ Innovation Ecosystem

3


