
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Context
The  Minamata  Convention  on  Mercury
was  convened  by  the  United  Nations
Environment Programme in 2013 (UNEP,
2013)  to  discuss  the  environmental
impact  of  mercury  from  industrial  and
other wastes. Dental amalgam, one of the
oldest  and affordable filling materials,  is
considered a mercury-based product and
was  listed,  among  others.  The  meeting
recommended a  global  phase-out  of  all
such  products  by  2020  except  dental
amalgam  which  was  scheduled  for  a
global phase-down.  

This  means  that  while  industries  and
products  that  utilize  mercury  will  be
banned, usage of dental amalgam will be
reduced  for  the  time  being.  Moreover,
reduction  strategies  for  dental  amalgam
were documented for adoption by parties.
Kenya  is  a  signatory  to  the  convention
and  is  at  an  advanced  stage  towards
becoming  a  party.  This  has  huge
implications  for  access  to  restorative
dental  treatment  for  a  majority  of  the
Kenyans (Osiro et al., 2019).

Dental  caries  or  tooth  decay  is  a
ubiquitous  public  health  problem.  It
affects  60-90  per  cent  of  adults  in
industrialized countries  (Petersen,  2004;
Petersen, 2007). In Kenya, nearly 25 per 

cent of  adults and 50 per cent of  children
under 5-years suffer from the condition (Fig
1)  (Kenya  National  Oral  Health  Survey,
2015). 

Despite  the  high  national  prevalence  of
tooth  decay,  oral  health  is  poorly  funded
and receives  only  0.0016 per  cent  of  the
national budget for health, limited to 8 per
cent  of  the  total  Government  expenditure
(Kaimenyi, 2004). This provision is grossly
inadequate.  Therefore,  access  to
restorative  dental  care remains  limited for
the majority and often, removal of offending
teeth  is  a  cheaper  alternative.  Tooth  loss
affects  mastication  and  speech  and  is
associated  with  reduced  quality  of  life
(Petersen, 2004; Petersen, 2007). 

For those who can access treatment in the
form of fillings, dental amalgam remains the
most  readily available and preferred filling
material  in  low-  and  middle-income
countries,  including  Kenya  as  it  is
inexpensive,  easy  to  use,  and  strong
enough  to  withstand  chewing  forces
(Petersen  et  al.,  2009).  Therefore,  the
phase-down  of  dental  amalgam  will  have
implications on oral health status in Kenya
through  the  unavailability  of  affordable
dental  treatment.  The  strategies
recommended for the phase-down of dental
amalgam as documented in the convention
report are presented in Box 1. 

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Health

Implications of the Minamata 
Convention on Mercury on Oral 
Health in Kenya
Dr. Olivia A. Osiro, Dr. Bernina K. Kisumbi, Prof. David K. Kariuki, Prof. Loice W. Gathece

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

17

Dental amalgam is scheduled
for a global phase-down 

Several phase-down 
strategies are available to
ensure that oral health is 
not affected by the 
unavailability of 
affordable dental 
treatment. 

he expected impact is 
improved oral health 
status of Kenyans 
through the adoption of 
disease prevention and 
health promotion.  

Furthermore, through 
improved access to 
affordable restorative 
dental care using low-
cost alternative filling 
materials.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Approach and Results
Our research explored locally available raw
materials  to  determine whether  they  may
be used to develop mercury-free alternative
dental filling materials. A low-cost mercury-
free alternative may be utilized in affordable
non-invasive  procedures  to  reduce  the
need  for  advanced  dental  treatment  and
may also  provide  job  opportunities  in  the
relevant industry. 

In a laboratory-based study, we evaluated
local  aluminosilicate  materials  for  use  in
cement  for  dental  fillings.  We  have
identified those based on kaolin to be the
most  promising  due  to  their  stability  in
moisture and the ability to release fluoride,
an essential  element  in  the  prevention of
tooth  decay  (Fig.  2).  Further  research  is
necessary  to  develop  the  prototype  to
acceptable  quality  that  has  adequate
strength to withstand chewing forces. 

Policy 
Recommendations
The  measures  in  Box  1  are  thematically
interconnected   to   promote   oral    health 

through  disease  prevention,  reduce  the
need  for  restorations  and  encouraging
best  practice  in  the  handling  of  dental
amalgam waste.

Short-Term 
 To  set  national  objectives  aimed  at

dental  caries  prevention  and  health
promotion,  to  minimize  the  need  for
dental restoration; 

 To encourage representative profess-
ional organizations and dental schools
to  educate  and  train  dental  profess-
ionals  and  students  on  the  use  of
mercury-free  dental  restoration
alternatives  and  on  promoting  best
waste management practices.

 To promote research and development
of  quality  mercury-free  materials  for
dental restoration.

 Implementation of disease prevention
and health promotion programmes to
reduce dental disease prevalence. 

Medium-Term
 Promotion and support from a national

agency  to  improve  prospects  and
eventual uptake of a locally developed
mercury-free  dental  restoration
product  for  minimally  invasive
procedures. 

Acknowledgements
This policy brief is derived from a PhD awarded
by the University of Nairobi in 2019. Support for
this  work  is  from  the  University  of  Nairobi,
Kenya, the Consortium for Advanced Research
Training  in  Africa  (CARTA),  the  National
Research  Fund,  Kenya  and  the  DAAD,
Germany.

References
Kaimenyi,  J.  T.  (2004).  Oral  health  in

Kenya.  International  Dental  Journal, 54,  378-
388. 

Kenya National Oral Health Survey Report.
(2015). Ministry of Health: Nairobi, Kenya. 

Minamata Convention on Mercury. (2013).
United  Nations  Environment  Programme:
Geneva, Switzerland.

Osiro, O. A., Kariuki, D. K., Gathece, L. W.
2019.  The  Minamata  Convention  on  Mercury
and  its  implication  for  the  management  of
dental  caries  in  low-  and  middle-income
countries.  International  Dental  Journal, 69(4),
247-251. 

Petersen,  P.  E.  (2004).  Challenges  to
improvement of oral health in the 21st century-
the approach of the WHO Global  Oral Health
Programme.  International  Dental  Journal,  54,
329-343.

Petersen,  P.  E.  (2008).  World  Health
Organization global  policy  for  improvement  of
oral  health-World  Health  Assembly  2007.
International Dental Journal, 58, 115-121.

Petersen, P., Baez, R., Kwan, S. & Ogawa,
H.  (2009)  Future  use  of  materials  for  dental
restoration. World  Health  Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 1-56.

Fig 1: Gum disease and dental caries

 

Fig 2: Kaolin-based dental cementcylinders
for compressive strength tests

Authors
Dr Olivia A. Osiro (oaosiro@uonbi.ac.ke)
Dr Bernina K. Kisumbi (kkisumbi@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Conservative and Prosthetic 
Dentistry, School of Dental Sciences, University of
Nairobi, P. O. Box 19676 – 00202, Nairobi, Kenya.
Prof. David K. Kariuki (kkariuki@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Chemistry, School of Physical 
Sciences, University of Nairobi, P. O. Box 30197 –
00100, Nairobi, Kenya.
Prof. Loice W. Gathece (gathece@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Periodontology, Community and 
Preventive Dentistry, School of Dental Sciences, 
University of Nairobi, P. O. Box 19676 – 00202, 
Nairobi, Kenya.

Box 1: Minamata Convention, Annex A, 
Part II4
Nine measures to phase down the use of 
dental amalgam:
(i) Setting national objectives aiming at 

dental caries prevention and health 
promotion, thereby minimizing the need
for dental restoration;

(ii) Setting national objectives aiming at 
minimizing its use;

(iii) Promoting the use of cost-effective and 
clinically effective mercury-free 
alternatives for dental restoration; 

(iv) Promoting research and development 
of quality mercury-free materials for 
dental restoration;

(v) Encouraging representative professional
organizations and dental schools to 
educate and train dental professionals 
and students on the use of mercury-
free dental restoration alternatives and 
on promoting best management 
practices;

(vi) Discouraging insurance policies and 
programmes that favour dental 
amalgam use over mercury-free dental 
restoration;(vii) Encouraging insurance 
policies and programmes that favour 
the use of quality alternatives to dental 
amalgam for dental restoration;

(vii) Restricting the use of dental amalgam 
to its encapsulated form;

(vii) Promoting the use of best 
environmental practices in dental 
facilities to reduce releases of mercury 
and mercury compounds to water and 
land.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

18


