
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Context
More  than 1.725 billion  learners  across
the globe are currently affected due to the
closure  of  their  learning  institutions  in
response  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic
(UNICEF June 2020).  Over 98% of  the
world's  student  population  have  found
themselves  out  of  school  due  to  the
COVID-19  outbreak.  This  population
includes  university  students  who  were
aspiring  to  complete  their  academic
years.  Schools and colleges are making
every effort  to ensure that teaching and
learning  are  going  on  even  during
lockdown  occasioned  by  COVID-19.
Examples  of  postponed  examinations
include  Cambridge  International
Examination  and  Kenya  National
Examinations.  The  closure  of  learning
institutions  has  impacted  not  only  the
students but also the teachers and school
leaders. In response to school closures,
the use of online, e-learning and distance
learning platforms have remained a key
option  available  for  the  continuation  of
learning.
Until the COVID-19 pandemic threatened
university education, adoption of distance
education  and  in  particular,  online
learning  in  public  universities  in  Kenya,
has  been  very  slow.  Online  learning

provides access to higher education without
physical contact in response to the COVID-
19 crisis. 
Distance  education  has  experienced
resistance and a lot of challenges especially
in  developing  countries  including  Kenya.
With  the  closure  of  schools  and  colleges
leaders  must,  of  necessity,  change  their
leadership  styles.  Their  traditional  roles
have to fit the ongoing emergency to ensure
that  the  gains  in  the  educational  system
thus far does not go to waste. Their roles
have  changed  dramatically  and
unexpectedly without history from which to
draw their experience. This kind of situation
requires a new kind of leadership that will
ensure  that  all  the  stakeholders  are  on
board  to  carry  out  their  normal  teaching
roles.  Managers  should  adopt  the
transformational  leadership  characteristics
for  effective  leadership  that  has  been
established  through  research  and  which
puts staff member’s needs first. Institutions’
leaders, if well equipped with the necessary
skills,  will  be  able  to  address  the  desired
change to ensure students’ well-being and
online teaching.   

The Government of  Kenya has continually
urged  universities  to  come  up  with
innovative  ways  of  delivering  higher

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Education and Training – Globally competitive quality education, 
training and research for sustainable development

Transformational Leadership in 
Adopting Online Learning
Dr Naomi W. Gikonyo and Dr Anne W. Ndiritu

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

55

Effective training is a key 
determinant for adopting 
online learning in educational
institutions.

Transformational leadership 
characteristics are important 
in managing change that is 
required in learning 
institutions during the 
COVID-19 pandemic and 
beyond.

Modelling the way is a necessity 
in university management of 
online teaching and learning 
through COVID-19 Season



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

education  and  meeting  human  resource
needs  in  the  country  in  support  of  the
Vision 2030 Social Pillar. In the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic, this has taken on a
sense  of  urgency  as  universities  remain
closed,  at  least  for  face-to-face  teaching
and  learning.  The  management  of
universities have been putting measures in
place in terms of  necessary infrastructure
and capacity building for faculty to embrace
open,  distance  and  e-learning  as  an
innovative  way  to  increase  access  and
equity  in  higher  education.  Despite
significant  investment,  this  had  not  been
taken  up  until  COVID-19  struck  which
called for a paradigm shift. More university
managers  have  been  forced  to  lead  the
way  to  ensure  learning  and  teaching
activities  in  their  respective  academic
institutions  continue  uninterrupted.  The
findings presented in this policy brief form
part  of  earlier  research  conducted  in
selected  universities  and  secondary
schools in  Kenya (Gikonyo, 2013;  Ndiritu,
2013).

Study Approach and 
Results

The  study  was  carried  in  the  public
universities  in  Kenya  to  investigate  the
extent  to  which  managers'  level  of
knowledge in distance education influenced
their  participation  in  distance  education
activities  in  public  universities  in  Kenya.
The  sample  consisted  of  196  managers
drawn from seven public universities.  The
results indicated that there was a significant
positive  correlation  between  the  level  of
knowledge  in  distance  education  and
university  managers’  participation  in
distance  education  activities.  Training  in
distance  education,  which  includes  online
learning and e-learning as well as training
in computer application skills was found to
be a major  factor  determining how well  a
manager participates in distance education
activities (Gikonyo, 2012). Based on these
findings, therefore, it is important to ensure
that the managers are trained in distance
education  and  its  practice  in  adopting
online  learning  and  e-learning.  With  a
transformational  leadership  approach  and
serving  as  a  role  model  (embracing  and
understanding  distance  education),
managers  can  ensure  that  no  one  is  left
behind in embracing the coveted change of
online  teaching  and  learning  during  this
COVID-19 era and beyond. The application
of  the  knowledge  and  skills  gained  will
greatly improve access and equity in higher

education  in support  of  county,  national
and international development agendas.

Research  has  shown  that  where
managers  adopt  a  transformational
leadership  style,  the  rest  of  the
organization typically adopts the required
changes.  Serving as a model  is one of
the  characteristics  of  transformational
leadership where the leader displays the
characteristic that he/she wants to see in
his/her  followers.  For  example,  a  study
carried out with a target population of 72
principals  in  public  schools  and  139
principals  in  private schools  indicated a
positive  correlation  between  modelling
characteristic  of  transformational
leadership  and  school  performance
(Ndiritu, 2012). 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 There is a need to provide in-service

training periodically for all the lecturers
in  university  management  to  update
their  skills  in  transformational
leadership especially where there is a
need  for  changes.  This  is  evident
during  this  COVID-19  pandemic
where there is a need to train on the
use of technology for online teaching
and learning.  The training should  be
conducted  virtually  or  face  to  face.
This  training  should  take  a
standardized  approach  to  the
provision  of  leadership  development.
Choices of provision have to be made
taking into consideration factors such
as  the  current  training  and
development  opportunities,  the
availability  of  expertise,  country
governance  arrangements  and  the
current  and  anticipated  quality  and
availability of leadership.

 Members  should  be  encouraged  to
participate  in  training by  giving them
incentives.

Medium-Term
 There  is  a  need  to  have  a  pool  of

trained  personnel  in  transformational
leadership  as  many  leaders  find
themselves in leadership by default. 

 There  is  a  need  therefore  for
succession planning in that university
leaders  are  not  elected  when  the
positions fall vacant. These unplanned

reactions  to  events  with  little  prior
preparation  before  positions  become
vacant is what many ineffective leaders
find themselves in.  Planned succession
not  only  propagates continuity  but  also
brings freshness into leadership.  Future
leaders should be identified and trained
in  transformational  leadership  well  in
advance before positions fall vacant.

 There is a need to incorporate transfor-
mational  leadership  in  all  postgraduate
courses. This is because most lecturers
come  from  this  cohort  and  therefore
likely to find themselves in leadership.

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  was  derived  from  PhD
theses from the two authors. These theses
were  supervised  by  Prof  Gakuu,  Prof.
Mboroki,  Prof  Kimani,  and  Prof  Nyaga  to
whom they are greatly indebted.

References
Gikonyo, N.W., Gakuu, C.M, Mboroki 

D.G, Ndiritu A. (2013) University Managers' 
Participation in Distance Education: What 
Role Does Their Level of Knowledge in 
Distance Education Play?" A research 
paper presented at an academic 
conference in the school of continuing and 
distance education, University of Nairobi, 
Kenya.

Ndiritu, A. Gikonyo N. "Preaching and 
drinking wine: A necessity for 
transformational leaders in effective 
schools." International Journal for Education
and Research. 2015;2.

Gikonyo, N.W. (2012) Factors 
influencing university managers’ 
participation in distance education: A case 
of public universities in Kenya. Unpublished
PhD thesis, University of Nairobi.

Ndiritu, A. (2012) Effects of principals’ 
transformational leadership characteristics 
on students’ academic performance in 
secondary schools in Nairobi Province, 
Kenya. Unpublished PhD thesis, University 
of Nairobi.

UNICEF June 2020: UNICEF Global 
COVID-19 Situation Report No. 8

Authors
Dr Naomi Wairimu Gikonyo 
nmwangi@uonbi.ac.ke
Dr Anne Wairimu Ndiritu
anne.ndiritu@uonbi.ac.ke
ODeL Campus
University of Nairobi

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

56


