
AfricaConnect3: Connecting Africa to 
Unlimited possibilities 

Leïla Dekkar1, Silvia Fiore2  
1GÉANT, Level 6, Hoekenrode 3, 1102 BR, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

Tel: +31 (0)20 530 4488 Email: Leila.Dekkar@geant.org 
2GÉANT, Level 6, Hoekenrode 3, 1102 BR, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 

Tel: +31 (0)61 178 2816 Email: Silvia.Fiore@geant.org 
 

Abstract:  

Despite availability of infrastructures having significantly progressed over the recent 
years, tertiary education and research institutions in Africa are still among the least 
connected in the academic world, a situation that is particularly critical for 
landlocked countries. In this context, the AfricaConnect3 project strives to establish 
secure, adequate, and affordable network infrastructures and offers dedicated 
services to African National Research and Education Networks (NRENs), as well as 
it builds adequate human resource capacities and expertise within the community and 
raises the awareness of the role of digital transformation for research and education 
(R&E). This paper aims at presenting the achievements and impact of 
AfricaConnect3 on African R&E communities, as well as advocating for NRENs, by 
detailing the activities implemented and services offered to R&E institutions in 
Africa. Finally, this paper addresses the need for NRENs to be better represented in 
the African digital landscape and understood as part of the solution. 

Keywords: AfricaConnect, AfricaConnect2, AfricaConnect3, Internet Connectivity, 
Research and Education Community, NRENs, global, connectivity, eduroam, digital 
divide, inclusion, eduGAIN, roaming, students, authentication, federation, 
UbuntuNet Alliance, WACREN, ASREN, GÉANT, European Commission. 

 
 

1. Introduction  
 With an exponential population growth in Africa that should reach 2.5 billion people by 
2050[1], investing in human capital is essential. Youth unemployment is a critical issue 
affecting many countries across the continent, and tertiary education and research are 
sectors which should play a key role in addressing this problem by fostering the 
development of human capital and skills and contributing to economic growth and to the 
creation of societal opportunities. Those sectors however do not fully maximise their 
potential and fail to deliver the expected social and economic returns.  
  
 Although the African continent is surrounded by submarine cables, it also faces some of 
the lowest internet penetration rates worldwide. This results in Africa contributing to less 
than 2% of the world's research output with only 91 researchers per million people 
compared to 4,272 for North America and Western Europe[2]. 
This is partly due to the high costs of connectivity and e-infrastructure, a situation primarily 
created by Telecom monopolies, landing station monopolies, and last mile monopolies. 

mailto:Leila.Dekkar@geant.org
mailto:Silvia.Fiore@geant.org


Other issues of concerns are the absence of harmonised ICT legal and regulatory 
frameworks and, in certain countries, excessive taxation of telecommunication providers[3]. 
Therefore, some countries are lagging behind in terms of national fibre infrastructure and 
NRENs in some countries not yet having national backbones. 
If properly harnessed, the Internet can provide both students and lecturers with a wealth of 
invaluable educational resources. Lecturers can use the Internet to prepare lessons, 
disseminate information to students and assess them, and students can access online content 
to extend their range of learning.  
  

Yet, despite availability of infrastructures having significantly progressed over the recent 
years, especially through the deployment of international undersea cables circling Africa, 
tertiary education and research institutions in Africa are still among the least connected in 
the academic world, a situation that is particularly critical for landlocked countries.  
As a result, those factors translate into a general disconnectedness of the continent from the 
global digital economy and all its opportunities.  
 
In this context, strengthening the African Research and Education Networks (RENs) is key 
to address the problem. As of March 2021, Africa hosts 38 National Research and 
Education Networks (NRENs) accounting for around a third of the world’s total. Each 
NREN serves the ICT needs of its national research and education communities. At an 
upper level, NRENs are interconnected through three Regional Research and Education 
Networks (RRENs):  

• Northern African NRENs are grouped under the Arab States Research and Education 
Network (ASREN).  

• West and Central Africa NRENs form the Western and Central African Research and 
Education Network (WACREN). 

• Eastern and Southern Africa NRENs form the UbuntuNet Alliance (UA).  
 

This paper will address some of the key achievements of the AfricaConnect3 project and 
point out to the main challenges that are obstructing further development in the R&E 
continent. It begins by briefly explaining the objectives and the methodology of the project, 
and continues to demonstrate NRENs’ added value detailing the vast array of implemented 
services in the field of network management, cloud, sustainability, capacity building, and 
advocacy and donor engagement. It shows the main achievements and impact, with a 
special focus on the key role of NRENs on higher education during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Finally, it lays out the project’s business benefits for African researchers and 
students, the NRENs, and the R&E community worldwide. 

 

1. Objectives 
 
The AfricaConnect3 project aims to support the creation and consolidation of national and 
regional RENs across Africa that provide access to dedicated, high-capacity internet 
connectivity and offer a gateway to global R&E collaborations through their 
interconnection with the pan-European GÉANT network. 
 
AfricaConnect3 strives to enhance access to tertiary education and research institutions by 
establishing secure, adequate, and affordable network infrastructures. It fosters the 
development of research and education through services, applications, and dedicated user 
support. Finally, it builds adequate human resource capacities and expertise within NRENs 



and education and research communities and raises the awareness of the role of digital 
transformation for education and research.  
 
 This paper will present the main achievements of the AfricaConnect3 project in African 
R&E communities and will advocate for the case for African NRENs defending the right 
for Africa research and education not to be left behind in an increasingly digitalised world. 
 
 

2. Methodology 
 
The AfricaConnect3 project is implemented through the following Work Packages:  

• Network Management and E-infrastructures. RRENs ensures secure, adequate, 
and affordable network infrastructures by providing daily management of the 
networks, to include procurement for expansions and upgrades. 

• Dedicated Services for R&E Institutions. RRENs deploy Trust and Identity 
services, such eduroam and eduGAIN, and ensure cybersecurity by establishing 
security team services and a cooperation framework for NREN Computer Security 
Incident Response Teams (CSIRTs).  

• Sustainability and Capacity Building. On a regional level, RRENs focus on 
building human resource capacity and expertise through strengthening their own 
governance and implementing their financial sustainability plans. On a national 
level, the project’s partners support their member NRENs by hosting trainings and 
workshops, promoting exchange of best practices and strengthening coordination.  

• Advocacy and Donor Engagement. RRENs have set up an advocacy and donor 
engagement strategy and plan targeted at decision makers as well as at international 
donors and other stakeholders to influence policy change and mobilise funding. 

 
The implementation of these activities follows a regional approach. The local NRENs are 
grouped under geographical areas (also known as “clusters”) and are involved in the 
delivery of the project in their respective regions. The three clusters are: 

• Cluster 1: Eastern and Southern Africa, led by UbuntuNet Alliance. 
• Cluster 2: Western and Central Africa, led by the Western and Central African 

Research and Education Network (WACREN). 
• Cluster 3: North African region, led by the Arab States Research and Education 

Network (ASREN). 
 
 In the execution of their activities, the African RRENs liaise with their own 
constituencies (member NRENs) and also seek to maximise synergies across regions in the 
different areas, such as deployment of connectivity, capacity building, and open science 
cloud. As a result, this fosters collaboration between R&E communities in Africa as well as 
in Europe, which may lead to other opportunities under EU programmes such as Erasmus+ 
and Horizon Europe.   
 
 

3. Services Offer 
 



3.1 Network Management and E-infrastructure 
To ensure that users continue to benefit from secure, adequate, and affordable network 

infrastructures, RRENs have set up a Network Operating Centre (NOC), staffed by 
engineers who monitor performance, resolve any issues that arise and take preventative 
steps to optimise up-time. RRENs also extend or upgrade the infrastructures as and when 
required to cater for any additional needs. 
Cloud e-infrastructures are especially relevant to support the development of a trusted and 
open environment for the scientific community to store, share and re-use scientific data and 
results. RRENs deploy cloud e-infrastructure individually, with the ultimate aim of 
achieving inter-operability in order to consolidate a common African Open Science 
platform for flexible and seamless access to a wealth of online computing services and data 
repositories. 
 
3.2 Dedicated Services for R&E Institutions  

As they become more digitally driven, academic and research institutions need specific 
services to support their collaboration activities and to access resources worldwide. In 
collaboration with the NRENs, the partners  raise awareness among end users of the 
available relevant services gather the requirements of the end users and identify technical 
recommendations for the deployment of additional e-services and applications such as Trust 
and Identity services, including eduroam and eduGAIN.  
With the motto “Open your laptop and be online!”, eduroam enables students and 
researchers to enjoy the most secure encryption and authentication standards in existence 
today as well as roaming access in more than 100 territories. The eduroam community is a 
worldwide success with over 2 billion international authentications to date[4].  
eduGAIN, instead, simplifies access to content, resources and the trustworthy exchange of 
information related to identity, authentication and authorisation (AAI). With about 2,390 
identity providers accessing services from about 1,520 service providers, eduGAIN has fast 
become the primary inter-federation mechanism for research and education collaborations 
around the world[5].  
 

Furthermore, AfricaConnect3 support the provision of dedicated services to African 
communities and support specific or cross-border end-user communities (e.g., librarians 
and Earth observations groups). An example is the LIBSENSE (Library Support for 
Embedded NREN Services and E-infrastructure) initiative. The WACREN-led activity 
brings together RENs and academic library communities in order to strengthen open access 
and open science in Africa. It aims at providing shared open access infrastructures (regional 
repository and journal hosting platforms) and federated identity management for library 
communities. Since its start, the initiative has hosted several workshop and can already 
count multiple achievements, including three regional surveys and reports, terms of 
Reference for NREN-Library collaboration in African countries, metadata guidelines for 
repositories, plans for a regional repository hosting service, national and institutional policy 
templates. 
 
3.3 Sustainability and Capacity building 

AfricaConnect3 focuses on strengthening human resources capacities and expertise at 
different levels. At regional level, the partners strengthen their own governance and systems 
and implement their sustainability plans. They also provide support to their member 
NRENs in order to encourage exchange of ideas and best practices as well as to reinforce 
technical skills through trainings in specific areas.  
An example of this is the RRENs’ support for the development of a community of women 
in African NRENs and promote the role of women in science, technology, engineering and 

https://spaces.wacren.net/display/LIBSENSE/Home
https://spaces.wacren.net/display/LIBSENSE/Survey
https://spaces.wacren.net/display/LIBSENSE/Survey
https://spaces.wacren.net/display/LIBSENSE/Survey
https://spaces.wacren.net/display/LIBSENSE/Survey


mathematics (STEM). Leading the Women-in-WACREN initiative, WACREN hosts 
hackathons and cyber events, equipping women with a robust skillset in IT, computers, and 
software. Another example of how African RENs and NRENs have been actively engaging 
women and girls in STEM is the ICT4Girls program led by the Nigerian NREN, Eko-
Konnect. The program offers online courses for women to gain hands-on skills in physical 
computing and data analysis, virtual hackathons to exploit what they learn and conferences 
to build community and promote innovation in tech. 
 
3.4 Advocacy and donor engagement 

In order to emphasise the role of digital tools in the transformation of education and 
research and their multiplier effect for skills development, employability and economic 
growth, AfricaConnect3  has a greater focus on Advocacy and Donor Engagement and sets 
up campaigns targeted at decision makers as well as at international donors and other 
stakeholders to influence policy change and mobilise funding. 
The project’s partners are committed to join regional conferences where they are able to 
engage with end users or with peers with a specific outreach focus on earth observations 
and agricultural capacities. 
 
 

4. Achievements to date 
 
Since the start of the project in 2011, 20 countries have been connected to the regional 

networks: Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, 
Rwanda, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe (under the 
UbuntuNet Alliance), Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Nigeria and Togo (under WACREN), Algeria, 
Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia (under ASREN).  
 

October 2010 October 2016 December 2020 
 

  

 
Figure 1: AfricaConnect3 Connectivity Map evolution 

 
 
The AfricaConnect project enabled over 540 institutions to have access to more affordable, 
reliable and high-speed internet to exchange high volumes of research data. This represents 
over 5 million students and researchers in Africa that can freely collaborate with their peers 
across the globe. 
 



Beyond connecting institutions, African Research and Educations networks have a 
multiplier effect and a greater impact on society: from helping researchers solve some of 
society’s greatest challenges, in fields like disaster management, agriculture, healthcare, 
environment, climatology and more, to bridging the digital divide and unlocking 
opportunities for online education and training.  
 
In particular during the COVID-19 pandemic, RENs have confirmed their place at the heart 
of R&E networking by supporting the survival of higher education institutions.  
In North Africa, the Ministry of Education in Morocco launched an e-learning portal, 
Morocco eLPortal, hosted by the MARWAN network. EUN, the Egyptian Universities 
Network, has coordinated with IT vendors to support university services in the country. The 
Tunisian NREN, CCK, has set up a Jitsi-based videoconferencing tool for online classes in 
Tunisian universities as well as a VPN-SSL service for easy access to scientific resources 
for the academic community. 
 

In East and Southern African, the Zambian NREN, ZAMREN, installed Moodle offering 
free hosting for 22 member institutions across the country. In Kenya, KENET is offering a 
40% discount on data bundle to university students. In Uganda, RENU unveiled the metro 
eduroam initiative aimed at expanding the reach of the NREN’s network to users beyond 
university campuses. The Ugandan Research and Education Network also introduced zero-
rated mobile access for students and staff of its member institutions. 
 

In Western and Central Africa, WACREN is organising online training activities, 
including LIBSENSE online workshops, and has been supporting the COVID-19 Smart 
Development Hack by gathering implementation proposals on an Open Science platform in 
response to the pandemic. The regional REN also offered its members a licensed use on its 
Zoom service until the end of 2020 to support their need for online collaboration tools. In 
Ghana, GARNET is conducting tests to support e-learning via a pilot eduID Ghana 
federation now involving providers from 12 institutions. In Sierra Leone, SLREN is helping 
higher education institutions to leverage existing commercial internet access to online e-
resources websites and provide zero rating of universities URLs.  
 
 

5. Business Benefits 
 

Despite the evident progress, NRENs and RRENs are still facing some specific 
challenges in Africa. The slow progress of some of them is not a reflection of a lack of 
interest on the part of potential end users. It is rather due to lack of awareness of their 
benefits and offering. 
While the need for NRENs may be well understood among academic and higher education 
communities, there is insufficient recognition of these organisations nationally and 
regionally. In some African countries, NRENs are wrongly seen by Telecom providers as 
competitors. They are also insufficiently represented in the African digital landscape and 
cannot adequately carry the voices and needs of their end users. Outreach and advocacy 
work is required to promote greater awareness of the role among national and regional 
policy makers, donors, decision makers in R&E institutions and telecom providers.  
 

The economic case for NRENs is very tangible: by regrouping the demand for internet 
connectivity and services nationally, universities and research centres can create economies 
of scale and obtain preferential rates.  



To provide connectivity to their institutional clients, NRENs lease capacity on fibre 
infrastructure. In this sense, they are like Internet Service Providers (ISPs), but, contrary to 
commodity networks, NRENs’ bandwidth offering is not shared. 
NRENs’ added-value lies in the fact that they provide dedicated bandwidth to each of their 
member institutions, such as universities, research centres, vocational education and 
training institutions. They also offer higher levels of security and unique services that 
differentiate them from commercial ISPs, such as AAI, software licenses, library 
subscriptions, grid computing middleware, cloud computing services, computing hardware, 
e-learning and e-science applications as well as technical support.  
 

NRENs across the globe have a multiplier effect and a greater impact on society: from 
helping researchers solve some of society’s greatest challenges, in fields like disaster 
management, agriculture, healthcare, environment, climatology and more, to bridging the 
digital divide and unlocking opportunities for online education and training. 
 
 
5.1 Benefits to African students and researchers 

AfricaConnect3 greatly improves access for researchers, students and institutions to 
digital infrastructures and technologies, connecting Africa to unlimited possibilities  
More specifically, NRENs narrow the digital divide by improving access to and reducing 
cost of advanced, reliable internet connectivity for R&E. During the first two phases of the 
AfricaConnect project, focus was primarily on connecting NRENs to the global R&E 
community. But now NRENs are also deploying value-added services, such as eduroam, 
with 16 African countries now being eduroam operators[6] and 7 additional ones in a pilot 
deployment phase. Not only they provide African students and researchers with high-speed, 
reliable broadband connectivity and services, but also with access to innovative e-learning 
tools and advanced research resources. This, in turn, enables students and researchers to 
more collaborative learning and research with peers around the world.  
 
5.2 Benefits to African NRENs 

NRENs not only bring value to their partners by lowering down the cost of connectivity 
in complex market conditions, but they also strengthen capacity building among their 
partners to upscale human resources output and enhance human capital development, 
participate in global R&E events for increased exposure, and transfer knowledge and 
exchanging best practice. 
 
5.3 Benefits to Global Research and Education 

Looking at the global R&E community, NRENs’ added value lies in the fact that they 
connect Africa’s scientists, students and educators to the world to, bridging the digital 
divide and fighting brain drain in Africa and, in turn, unlocking its enormous potential. 

 
 

6. Conclusions 
 

R&E connectivity and collaboration tools and services provided by NRENs can only be 
successful and beneficial to societies when built and managed by people supported to do the 
task. In countries where little national support and recognition is given to the ICT experts 
who specialise in running networks for specific R&E needs, it is challenging to realise the 
full potential. Building adequate human capacity and technical skills is essential for 
interconnecting the world, and the regional network projects play an important role in 
building the required skill sets among NREN staff. 



 
This paper demonstrated that AfricaConnect3 and its partner NRENs greatly improve 

access for researchers, students and institutions to digital infrastructures and technologies, 
connecting Africa to unlimited possibilities.  
The current and third phase of the project aims at further extending the reach of the regional 
R&E networks in order to connect more countries and upgrade the capacity of the core 
networks as well as set up a cloud infrastructure for open science. The project also focused 
specifically on service applications, which include an open science cloud, network security, 
and trust and identity, as well as on capacity building and advocacy for research and 
education networking. 

 
This paper also made the case for African RENs and NRENs explaining that their real 

value goes beyond reduced bandwidth prices, in that they are able to provide an advanced 
and diversified portfolio of ICT services specific to the needs of their members that 
conventional ISPs, such as eduroam, cloud services, eduGAIN or library databases, do not 
provide. NRENs have proved to be a vital component in e-learning, e-science and e-
research strategies as they bring a common approach to the coordination and deployment of 
national and international communication networks and services.  
 

The AfricaConnect3 project seeks to establish that connectivity and NRENs are key to 
improving education and research, and that NRENs are part of the solution.  
 
 
 

Acknowledgements 
 

The AfricaConnect3 project is run in collaboration between the European Union, the 
pan-European networking organisation GÉANT and the three regional partners supporting 
local research and education networking across Africa: UbuntuNet Alliance (Eastern and 
Southern Africa), WACREN (Western and Central Africa) and ASREN (Northern Africa 
and Middle East Arab countries). 

 
AfricaConnect3 builds on the work carried out by AfricaConnect and AfricaConnect2 

and aims to foster the creation and consolidation of national and regional research and 
education (R&E) networks across Africa that provide access to dedicated, high-capacity 
internet connectivity and offer a gateway to global R&E collaborations through their 
interconnection with the pan-European GÉANT network. 
 

The total budget for AfricaConnect3 is 37.5 million euros for a period of 4 years from 
November 2019, with 30 million euros contributed by the European Commission’s 
Directorate-General International Cooperation and Development (DG DEVCO). The 
remaining funds (€7.5m) are being provided by the African partners. 
In each cluster, RRENs are responsible for their own grant agreement with the European 
Commission whilst GÉANT together with the partners is tasked with the overall project 
coordination role, including the procurement of connectivity and equipment for all clusters. 
 
 

References 
[1] ONE Report, The African Century, June 2017 



[2] UNESCO Institute for Statistics Fact Sheet No. 53, June 2019 FS/2019/SCI/53, data 
from 2016 
[3] Economic Commission for Africa, Review of the legal and regulatory frameworks in the 
information and communications technology sector in a subset of African countries: What 
lessons can we learn, 2017 
[4] eduroam [website] https://www.eduroam.org/ (accessed on 16/02/2021 
[5] eduGAIN [website] https://edugain.org/ (accessed on 16/02/2021)      
[6] monitor eduroam [website] https://monitor.eduroam.org/ (accessed on 16/02/2021) 

 

https://www.eduroam.org/
https://edugain.org/
https://monitor.eduroam.org/

	AfricaConnect3: Connecting Africa to Unlimited possibilities
	1. Introduction
	2. Methodology
	3. Services Offer
	3.1 Network Management and E-infrastructure
	3.2 Dedicated Services for R&E Institutions
	3.3 Sustainability and Capacity building
	3.4 Advocacy and donor engagement

	4. Achievements to date
	5. Business Benefits
	5.1 Benefits to African students and researchers
	5.2 Benefits to African NRENs
	5.3 Benefits to Global Research and Education

	6. Conclusions
	Acknowledgements
	References

