
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Mongroves Trees
(Photo: Karthik Easvur CC BY-SA.jpg)

Context
Mangrove  forests  in  Kenya  cover
approximately  61,271  hectares  along  a
536 km coastline supporting the livelihood
of approximately 3 million Kenyans. The
Lamu County  coastline  accounts  for  61
per cent of mangrove forest cover (GoK,
2017),  while  Mombasa  and  Kwale
Counties  account  for  the  remaining  29
per cent. Mangroves protect the shoreline
and provide habitat and shelter for marine
fish  and  other  organisms  that  are  a
source of food. The wood from the trees
are  also  utilized  by  communities  for
house  construction,  boat  building  and
furniture  making;  and  as  a  source  of
medicine,  dye,  firewood,  charcoal  and
fencing  poles.  Mangroves  are  also  very
important in protecting the shoreline from
erosion and excessive damage by floods,
hurricanes and tsunamis. Thus, they are
critical  in  sheltering  and  maintaining
habitats  and  breeding  grounds  vital  for
growth,  survival  and  reproduction  of
marine animals and fish. The trees also
absorb  carbon  dioxide  from  the
atmosphere  thus  contributing  to  climate
change mitigation. The increase in levels
of  carbon  dioxide  has  led  to  global
warming  resulting  in  unpredictable
changing  weather  conditions  being
experienced in different parts of the world
including  prolonged  droughts,  unusually

heavy  rains,  flooding,  hurricanes,  and
tsunamis.  

More  than  3,000  fish  species,  crabs,
shrimps, prawns, molluscs, oysters, among
others  live,  shelter  and  breed  in  the
mangrove  forests.  Marine  fishing  is  an
important  economic  activity  and  a  major
income  earner  producing  8,000  tons  of
marine  fish,  generating  KES  100  million
annually,  and  contributing  approximately
0.5 per cent of all the goods and services
produced in the country. Marine fish is also
an important protein source for inland and
coastal  communities.  Destruction  and
clearance  of  mangrove  forests  through
logging and over-harvesting directly affects
inshore  and offshore  commercial  fisheries
through lack of food, and loss of shelter and
breeding grounds for most fish, threatening
their  survival.   Also,  the  decline  in  fish
numbers causes a loss of vital income and
a much-needed protein source resulting in
malnutrition and food insecurity. In Kenya,
the loses are estimated at KES 582 million
every  year  for  inshore fisheries within the
mangroves.

The Kenya population census carried out in
2009  reported  a  total  coastal  human
population of 3.04 million (GoK, 2017). As
the  population  has  steadily  increased,  so
has  the  demand  for  fish  and  over-
exploitation  of  the  mangrove  forests  for

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Mangrove Degradation: Reversing 
the Trend through Community 
Engagement
 Virginia W. Wang’ondu

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

11

Community Sensitisation on 
growth characteristics of 
mangrove species to 
understand implications 
of over-utilisation

Development of holistic 
mangrove reforestation 
programme inclusive of 
all species

Funding of research that 
promotes 
biotechnological 
improvement of 
mangroves

Key Messages



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

firewood, construction materials, and other
resources.  Coastal  communities  have  a
preference  for  certain  mangrove  species
because  of  their  likeable  attributes  and
suitability  for  specific  purposes.  For
example,  there  is  a  preference  for  con-
struction wood from three species namely
Rhizophora mucronata,  Ceriops tagal  and
Bruguiera  gymnorrhiza leading  to  their
over-harvesting and over-exploitation.

A mangrove forest cover loss of 20 per cent
(450 ha/year) was recorded between 1985
and  2009  of  which  Mombasa  County
experienced a 70 per cent loss (Bosire et
al.,  2013).  This  puts  coastal  people  who
rely directly on mangroves at risk of losing
their livelihoods and experiencing increas-
ed poverty levels and is likely to escalate if
the destruction is not adequately address-
ed,  completely  stopped,  and  urgent  rest-
oration  of  degraded  forests  and  re-
afforestation  of  coastlines  initiated  and
encouraged.  

Figure 1 Mangrove species cover change
between  1992  to  2009  (Modified  from
Bosire et al., 2013)

 

Our Study
This policy brief is based on a study in Mida
creek,  Watamu  Marine  National  reserve,
Kilifi County (a marine protected area) that
investigated  the  effect  of  open access  to
mangrove  forests  on  mangrove
productivity,  benthic  (ecological  region  at
the bottom of the rivers/ocean) biodiversity
and fish productivity. In Kenya, the coastal
communities largely depend on three main
mangrove  trees  types,  Rhizophora

mucronata,  Ceriops tagal  and Bruguiera
gymnorrhiza, whose seeds take longer to
mature  –  more  than  18  months.  The
seeds of non-preferred tree types take 4
to 6 months to mature (Wang’ondu et al.,
2013).  The  long  maturity  of  preferred
species seeds affects their availability for
planting  through  natural  regeneration  or
reforestation.  Besides,  these  trees  take
10  to  15  years  before  they  reach  the
maturity stage suitable for harvesting. In
our study, it was observed that continued
cutting of these preferred species before
maturity, primarily for house construction,
has  affected  the  stand  structure  of
mangroves forests near human habitation
(Wang’ondu et al., 2017). This contributes
to forest cover loss and seed scarcity for
natural  regeneration  and  artificial
planting. Old trees that are left are poor
seed producers, making seedlings for re-
afforestation  to  be  in  short  supply  or
unavailable. Also, most of the community
nurseries  grow  one  species,  R.
mucronata,   that  is easy to grow in the
nursery. 

Community Participation 
There  is,  therefore,  an  urgent  need  to
create awareness, educate and train the
communities on sustainable utilization of
mangrove  trees,  conservation  of
threatened tree species and the need for
sustainable  seed  propagation  and  re-
afforestation efforts  to achieve desirable
forest cover, restore degraded coastlines,
enhance marine animal life and improve
community livelihoods through increased
incomes  and  food  security.  Recently,
coastal  communities  have  actively
participated  in  mangrove  conservation
through community conservation groups.
Women, who were not initially allowed to
participate  in  mangrove  planting  and
protection,  are  spearheading  mangrove
conservation  efforts.  This  has  greatly
boosted the number of tree nurseries and
trees  planted,  improving  forest
management  and  protection  of  restored
areas. 

For example, in Kwale County the Mikoko
Pamoja  community  project  has
endeavoured  to  conserve  mangrove
forest from destruction through a carbon
market initiative. The community is finan-
cially  compensated for  conserving  man-
grove  forests.   Its  duplication  in  other
counties  is  key,  backed  by  other
conservation  efforts.  In  addition,  coastal
farmers  through  Community  Forest
Associations  (CFAs),  guided  by  the
Kenya  Marine  Fisheries  Research
Institute,  Kenya  Forest  Service  (KFS),
Worldwide  Fund  for  Nature,  and  other
organizations  have  sought  alternative
trees, for example, Eucalyptus, Cypress,
Casuarina,  Mukeu  and  Mvule,  to  meet
wood  and  fuel  needs.  However,  since
some the value of mangroves cannot be
replaced  by  these  trees,  more  effort
needs to be directed toward the increase

mangrove  forest  cover.  It  is  evident  that
community  participation  has  and  will
continue to play a major role in mangrove
conservation. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Ministry  of  Environment  and  Forestry

through  KFS  and  CFAs  to  promote
utilization  of  non-preferred  mangroves
species for certain needs

 Community  sensitization  by  KFS  on
growth  characteristics  of  mangrove
species  to  understand  the  implications
of over-utilization of certain species. 

 KFS to organize training sessions in line
with  seed  development  and  growth
characteristics of mangrove species.

Medium-Term
 Ministry of Environment and Forestry to

develop  a  holistic  mangrove
reforestation  programme  which  is
inclusive of all species. 

 Government  funding  of  research  that
promotes  the  biotechnological
improvement  of  mangroves  whose
genetic resource is reduced. 

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this policy brief was supported by
AgriFose2030  and  ILRI/ReSAKSS  through
training on policy brief writing. Research informing
this policy brief was funded by VLIR-UOS. I would
like  to  thank  Dr  Esther  Kanduma  and  UoN
mentors team for their valuable technical input.

References
Bosire,  J,  O.,  Kaino  J.  J.,  Olagoke  A.  O.,

Mwihaki L. M., Ogendi G. M., Jairo J. G., Berger
U.  & Macharia D.  (2013).  Mangroves in peril:
unprecedented  degradation  rates  of  peri-urban
mangroves in Kenya. Biogeosciences, 10, 16371–
16404.

FAO  and  UNEP  (2016).  Valuing  coastal
ecosystem and economic assets: The importance
of  mangroves  for  food  security  and  livelihoods
among communities in Kilifi County and the Tana
Delta, Kenya.

Government  of  Kenya  (2017).  National
Mangrove Ecosystem Management  Plan.  Kenya
Forest Service, Nairobi, Kenya.

Wang’ondu, V.W., Kairo J.G., Kinyamario, J.
I.,  Mwaura F. B.,  Bosire J. O., Dahdouh-Guebas
F.  &  Koedam  N.   (2013).Vegetative  and
reproductive  phenological  traits  of  Rhizophora
mucronata Lamk. and Sonneratia alba Sm. Flora,
208: 522-531.

Wang’ondu V.  W.,  Muthumbi,  A.,  Vanruesel,
A.  & Koedam N. (2017). Phenology of mangroves
and its implication on forest management; a case
study  of  Mida  Creek,  Kenya.  WIO  Journal  of
Marine Science 16 (2): 41-51.

Author
Virginia W. Wang’ondu
(vwangondu@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Biological Sciences, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, University of Nairobi, 
Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

12


