
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Context
Most  causes  of  women’s  nutritional
problems  are  preventable.  Lack  of
variety,  poor  quality,  and  sufficient  food
during  pregnancy  are  important  factors
contributing  to  the  health  problems  of
expectant mothers and newborn children.
This exposes women to risk for anaemia,
hypertension,  miscarriages,  stillbirths,
gestational  diabetes,  pre-term  delivery
and/or even loss of the mother. Ignorance
and  lack  of  comprehensive  guiding
information  during  antenatal  and
postnatal  clinics  are  responsible  for  the
failure  of  observing  life-saving  eating
habits by expectant mothers. 

The ten food groups proposed to be
eaten  daily  by  women  of  reproductive
age  (FAO  and  FHI,  2016).  Women
should  eat  at  least  5  out  of  10  of  the
following  food  groups  daily:  (a)  grains,
white roots and tubers, and plantains; (b)
pulses (beans, peas and lentils), (c) nuts
and  seeds,  (d)  dairy,  (e)  meat,  poultry
and fish,  (f)  eggs,  (g)  dark  green leafy
vegetables, (h) other Vitamin A rich fruits
and vegetables, (i) other vegetables, and
(j) other fruits.

A varied diet rich in essential nutrients
is  vital  for  the  proper  growth  of  the
developing  fetus  and  leads  to  full-term
births  of  healthy  babies.  Consuming
different types of foods rich in essential
nutrients  help  build  the  body,  fight
diseases  and  provide  vital  energy  for
optimal body growth and function.

Dietary  intake  for  different
seasons
A  study  was  done  in  Mbooni  Division,
Makueni  District, during two seasons, pre-
harvest  (n=73)  and  post-harvest  (n=203)
(Ngala,  2015).  Non-lactating  and  non-
pregnant  women  who  had  children  aged
between  2-5  years  were  the  respondents
concerning  household  dietary  diversity  in
the two seasons. The diversity of women’s
diet  tends  to  decrease  from  5  to  4  food
groups  during  seasonal  change.  Even
though the energy intake increased slightly
after  harvesting from an average of  2,039
Kilo  Calories  (kCal)  to  2,097  kCal,  the
nutrient  adequacy  of  the  diet  was
unacceptable. 

The  food  groups  mostly  eaten  by
women,  irrespective  of  the  season,  were
starchy staples, vitamin C-rich vegetables,
vitamin A-rich dark green leafy vegetables,
all other fruits and vegetables, and legumes
and  nuts  (Figure  1).  Vitamin  A-rich  dark
green leafy  vegetables and all  other  fruits
and  vegetables  are  significantly  not
available  for  women's  consumption  after
harvest.  Also,  dairy  intake  is  very  low as
women  primarily  consume  through  very
minute quantities in tea.

Useful Strategies to Reverse
the Situation
Women  of  childbearing  age  need  to
consume  different  types  of  foods  that
provide all  the major nutrients required for
optimal  growth  and  body  functioning  to

Key Messages

Support establishment of 
kitchen gardening and 
keeping of small livestock
to increase food variety 
for pregnant women.

Every pregnant woman be 
given individual 
counselling on the 
consumption of a varied 
diet. 

Introduce mobile outreach 
antenatal clinics in all 
counties to improve 
coverage of counselling 
on diversified diet

Support development of 
digital tracking systems 
for antenatal clinics 
defaulters. 

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

43

Series F – Foundations : Ending Drought Emergencies

Drastic Massive Loss of Women’s 
Diets Diversity Due to Changes in 
Season
 Sophie Ngala and Dasel Mulwa Kaindi



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

improve  birth  survival  rates  and  increase
the proportion of normal weight births.  

At the clinic, counselling should start by
interrogating the diet history of mothers to
reveal  their  dietary  diversity.   Pregnant
women  should  be  counselled  on  what  a
diverse  diet  constitutes  especially  the  10
food  groups.   Where  poor  diets  are
identified, specific action should be taken.
The knowledge of the need to consume a
varied  diet  will  create a  demand for  food
production  for  home  consumption.
Therefore,  women  should  also  be
encouraged to  have kitchen gardens  and
rear small animals to ensure availability of
essential foods and improve vital nutrition. 

Women’s  visits  to  antenatal  clinics  are
poor  (Riang’a et al., 2017, Perumal, et al,
2013).  Two-thirds of the pregnant women
made one ante-natal clinic (ANC) visit. The
Kenya  Ministry  of  Health  (MOH)
recommends  four  visits,  while  the  World
Health  Organization  recommends  eight
ANC visits to ensure that women have all
the right information, continuous monitoring
and follow up (FAO and FHI 360,2016).

At the antenatal clinics it was found that
as women wait to be attended, nurses (not
nutritionists/dietitians)  gave  group  talks  to
women  on  various  issues,  though  their
busy schedules did not allow regular talks
(Perumal,  et  al.,  2013).  The  pregnant
woman:nurse  ratio  was  also  high,
preventing  individualized  counselling.
Further,  the contents of the talks given to
the pregnant women had not been formally
reviewed,  standardized  and  made  into  a
curriculum.  Besides,  consumption  of  a
varied diet was not being communicated to
the women at the ANC.

Women were found to eat a low number
of  different  food  groups  for  the  following
reasons (Ngala, 2015):

1. Consumption of starchy staples with very
little vegetables/fruits and animal source
foods.

2.  Very  few  women  snack  in  between
meals. even when pregnant.

3.  In Kenya, there is no policy on how to
determine  the  macro/micronutrient
adequacy  in  the  diets  of  women,
including pregnant women.

4.  Food consumption patterns remain the
same  even  as  the  seasons  change.
Little  advantage  is  taken  of  foods  in
season.

Other studies have found that:

1.  The  women  are  inhibited  by  cultural
myths,  taboos  and  practices  some  of
which are guided by ignorance (Riang’a
et al., 2017).

2.  Lacking knowledge of what alternatives
foods  to  buy  when  their  purchase
power  is  poor  and  still  consume
nutritious diets (de Sande, 2017; Best
Start, 2003).

3.   Some women are  encouraged to  eat
very  little  food and a limited  range of
food groups to prevent  the fetus from
growing too big, thus avoiding cesarean
sections  (Riang' an et al., 2017).

4.   Inadequate contact with ANCs, where
pregnant women could get information

on the consumption of  diverse diets
(Perumal, et al., 2013).

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Agricultural  extension  officers/

development  partners  to  support  the
women  with  the  establishment  of
kitchen  gardening/keeping  of  small
livestock  to  supplement  their  food
sources  to  ensure  availability  of
essential foods

 MOH to develop fliers and information
sheets  on  important  foods  essential
for the health of the mother and baby
and to encourage behaviour change.  

 MOH to develop a programme to use
ANCs  as  intervening  points  for
counselling  pregnant  women  on
important food groups to be included
in their daily diet.

 A  guideline  often  important  food
groups,  with  a minimum of  five  food
groups recommended per day, should
be prepared and availed at all ANCs. 

 MOH  to  recommend  at  least  four
compulsory  visits  to  ANCs  for
expecting mothers.

Acknowledgements
Preparation  of  this  policy  brief  was
supported  by  the  AgriFose2030
programme  and  the  International
Livestock  Research  Institute  (ILRI)  with
financial  support  from  the  Swedish
International  Development  Agency
(SIDA). Special thanks to my mentor, Dr
Dasel  Mulwa  Kaindi  for  his  mentorship
and  providing  valuable  technical  input,
encouragement  and  friendship.  Thanks
also  go  to,  Dr.  Joseph  Karugia,  Rita
Chuma and all AgriFose2030 team ILRI,
not forgetting the team that preceded us,
for  organizing  workshops  that
encouraged and strengthened us.

References
Best Start, 2003.  The impact of poverty

on pregnant women.  A guide to program
managers  2003.   Best  Start  -  Ontario's
Maternal  Newborn  and  Early  Child
Development Resource Centre.

FAO  and  FHI  360.  2016.  Minimum
Dietary  Diversity  for  Women:  A Guide for
Measurement. Rome: FAO and adapted by
the Ministry of Health, Kenya.

Perumal,  N.,  Cole,  D.C.,  Ouédraogo,
H.Z.,   Sindi,  K.,  Loechl,  C.,  Low,  J.,  and
Levin,  C.  (2013)  Health  and  nutrition
knowledge,  attitudes  and  practices  of
pregnant  women  attending  and  not-
attending ANC clinics in Western Kenya: a
cross-sectional analysis.

Ngala SA, (2015).  Evaluation of dietary
diversity  scores  to  assess  nutrient
adequacy  among  rural  Kenyan  women.
Unpublished  PhD  Thesis.  Wageningen
University, Netherlands.

Riang’a,  R.M.,  Broerse,  J.,  and
Nangulu,  A.K.  (2017).  Food  beliefs  and
practices  among  the  Kalenjin  pregnant
women in rural Uasin Gishu County, Kenya.

Van  de  Sande,  A.  [ed.]  (1999).  Child
and  Youth  Poverty  in  Sudbury. Sudbury:
Social  Planning  Council  of  the  Region  of
Sudbury

WHO Antenatal Care Guidelines (2016).
Malaria  in  Pregnancy  Frequently  Asked
Questions (FAO), March 2018.

Author
Sophie Ngala 
(sngala@uonbi.ac.ke)
Dasel Wambua Mulwa Kaindi 
(mulwa.dasel@uonbi.ac.ke), 
Department of Food Science, Nutrition and 
Technology, 
University of Nairobi. 
P. O. Box 25093-00625 Nairobi, Kenya.

Figure 1: Loss of dietary diversity of the diet as a
result  of seasonal change (Modified from Ngala,
2015)

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

44


