
Context
The  rapid  increase  in  devices

(mobile phones, computers, sensors, etc)
connected  to  the  Internet  (and  thus  to
databases)  has  resulted  in  exponential
growth in data generation and associated
EDTs  that  can  “identify  patterns  in
observed data, build explanatory models,
and  make  predictions  quicker  and  with
more  accuracy  than  humans”  (Pawelke
et  al.,  2017)  EDT/x-data-based applica-
tions and algorithms are mainly created
in the developed countries and often lack
transparency  arising  from  intellectual
property rights, thus hindering realization
of  the  enormous  potential  EDT/x-data-
based  applications  have  in  addressing
socio-economic  challenges  faced  by
developing  countries,  including  Kenya.
Where applications  exist, they are often
not  broadly  accessible,  especially  for
persons with disabilities, areas with slow
internet  connections  or  members  of
underrepresented groups.

In this policy brief, the generic term
“big  data”  is  unpacked  into  four
overlapping categories of data: big data,
open data, user-generated data and real-
time data, and are collectively referred as
“x-data”.   EDTs  are  taken  to  include
artificial  intelligence  (AI),  blockchain,
geographic  information  systems  (GIS),
internet  of  things  (IoT),  and  big  data
analytics. These methodologies are often
used  collectively.   Gaps  in  support
systems  to  develop  EDT/x-data-based
applications  have  created  new  digital
divides  between  developing  and
developed  countries.  Further,  barriers
persist  in use and take-up of  x-data by
decision-makers,   competing  data
sources,  quality  of  data,  limited  aware-
ness of  data existence, and inadequate
transformation  of  data  into  useful
information  or  tailoring  to  match  the
decision-makers’ needs (Pawelke et  al.,
2017). Kenya has recently ranked high in
sub-Saharan  Africa  (4/41  in  2020  and
3/41  in  2021)  and  fairly  well  globally
(71/172 in 2020 and 78/160 in 2021) on
the  Government  AI  Readiness  Index
(Oxford Insights and IDRC,2020; 2021).
The  index  evaluates  how  ready  a
government  is  to  implement  AI  in  the
delivery of public services.

Approach
An in-depth review of literature and

policy  and  regulatory  environment  was
carried  out.  This  was  followed  by
stakeholder  engagement  through
interviews/surveys. From the information
gathered, an assessment of the maturity
of  the  EDT  ecosystem  in  Kenya  was
undertaken to determine the stage of its

development and application.  The findings
were  used  to  develop   policy
recommendations  .   The  literature  review
followed a multi-vocal systematic approach
(Ogawa and Malen, 1991; Garousi, Felderer
and Mantyla,  2016) of  both peer-reviewed
academic  articles  and  grey  literature
covering the development and use of EDTs
in  Kenya.   The  grey  literature  reviewed
focused  on  reports,  trade  journals  and
technical articles, books and book chapters.
The governance frameworks,  embodied in
policies,  laws,  and  regulations  relevant  to
EDTs arising from the literature review, were
identified  and  synthesized  providing  an
overview  of  the  regulatory  and  policy
environment  and are available  in   the full
report  on  A Deep Dive on the Maturity  of
Emerging Digital Technologies Ecosystems
in Kenya and South Africa. 

Maturity  or  development  stage
models of an ecosystem provides tools for
assessment of where an ecosystem is in its
life  cycle.   They  provide  insights  into  the
current  levels  of  recognized  success
factors,  essential  for  the  maturity,  health,
and  sustainability  of  the  ecosystem.  The
emerging technologies ecosystem maturity
model, developed by Ogot et al. (2023) was
used for this study.  It is based on the five
fundamental  activities  of  innovation
processes  framework  (Liu  and  White,
2001):  education,  research (basic,  deve-
lopmental,  engineering),  implementation
(manufacturing,  deployment),  end-use
(customers of the product or process) and
linkages (bringing together complementary
knowledge) (see Table 1).

Table 1 – Indicators used to assess the
state of maturit3

EDUCATION: Quality of graduates 
(measured by quality or availability of hires),
New Masters and PhDs, university post-
graduate programmes, researchers and 
professionals engaged in R&D, Africa/global
ranking of universities with post-graduate 
relevant programmes, policies.
RESEARCH: Related Publications, R&D 
projects, patents, availability of funding for 
R&D, pilot projects, availability of required 
equipment, policies
END USE: Government targets, industry 
targets, demand from government, demand 
or opportunities in the market, demand or 
opportunities beyond the borders, policies.
LINKAGES: Technology dedicated 
workshops and conferences, network size, 
network intensity, collaboration with 
academia (or with private sector)
IMPLEMENTATION: New entrants, diversi-
fication activities of incumbents; avail-ability 
of funding (traditional, equity, venture 
capitalists, angel investors), interest groups,
policies

Strengthening the Emerging Digital 
Technologies Ecosystem in Kenya
Prof. Madara Ogot, Margaret Muthee, Rita Muriuki, Samuel Njuguna

©2023 Authors 1

The growth of connected 
devices and associated 
emerging digital technologies
(EDTs) has led to substantial
data generation

Developed countries dominate 
EDT/x-data based 
applications hindering their 
potential to address socio-
economic challenges in 
developing countries like 
Kenya

Accessibility issues exist for 
under-represented groups 
such as persons with 
disabilities and those in 
marginalized areas with slow
internet connections 

Four categories of data 
collectively referred to as “x-
data” are identified: big data, 
open data, user-generated 
data, and real-time-data.

Gaps in support systems have 
created digital divides 
between developing and 
developed countries

Challenges in data use persist 
due to competing sources, 
data quality, limited 
awareness and inadequate 
transformation

Kenya ranks well in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) readiness 
globally and in sub-Saharan 
Africa.

Key Messages



Table 2 – Stages of Maturity in the EDT/X-Data ecosystem
Fundamental 
Activities Ideation Stage Nascent Stage Growth Stage

Education  Few Masters and PhDs
 Small number of academic 

departments
 Small number of researchers 

engaged in related research

 Increased number of Masters and PhDs
 Small number of academic departments
 Increasing number of researchers engaged in 

related research

 Large number of Masters and PhDs
 Increased number of academic 

departments
 Increasing number of researchers 

engaged in related research
Research  Few or no patents,

 Small number of publications
 Few pilot projects
 Low R&D funding
 Few policies supporting R&D

 Increased number of patents
 increased number of publications
 Increased number of pilot projects
 Moderate R&D funding
 Strengthened policies supporting related R&D

 Increased number of patents
 Large number of publications
 Large number of pilot projects
 Adequate R&D funding
 Strengthened policies supporting R&D

End use  Insufficient demand and information 
for potential products and services, 
market size

 Better understanding of and increasing demand for
potential products and services, market size

 Good understanding of and robust 
demand for potential products and 
services, market size

Linkages  None or few international 
collaborations (research)

 Few linkages
 No clusters

 Small number of international collaborations 
(research and business)

 Small number of linkages
 A few clusters

 Moderate international collaborations 
(research and business)

 Moderate linkages
 Moderate clustering

Implementation  No/negligible active start-ups or 
existing businesses that  have 
diversified into the ET space

 A few active start-ups or existing businesses that 
have diversified into the ETs space but are in the 
early stages

 Establishment of governance framework
 Gaps in financing

 Moderate number of active start-ups or 
existing businesses that have diversified 
into the ETs space

 Facilitative governance framework
 Increasing private sector financing

Table 3: Maturity of the different stages in the EDTs ecosystem

Fundamental 
Activities / Stage

Remarks

Education
Growth

 52.4% of all universities offer an undergraduate programme providing a strong foundation for those who may go into the workforce 
related to emerging digital technologies or pursue further studies;

 Only 12.7% and 6.3% offer related Masters or PhD programmes, respectively, a fraction of the number of undergraduate programmes.
 Short courses are available in the core areas of EDTs and x-Data

Research
Nascent

 As a fraction of total patents applied for and granted in 2021, emerging digital technologies (excluding GIS) accounted for only 10.75 
and 8.3%, respectively;

 Journal publications, based on locally based research in EDTs were relatively few mainly as a result of small number of researchers 
working in these areas;

 Few local research output has been commercialised, however, efforts driven by the Kenya Innovation Agency (KENIA) are supporting 
universities to commercialise research output.

End use
Growth

 There is a strong market demand for and/or understanding of the potential uses of emerging digital technologies, especially as they 
have provided opportunities for Kenya to leapfrog legacy systems and offer services leveraging on the extensive mobile penetration.

 Mobile-based use has strong potential  due to familiarisation of most of the population with the devices (135% mobile subscriptions;  
72% mobile money penetration;  40% internet penetration).

Linkages
Growth

 Numerous and growing number of formal linkages provided through support from incubators, accelerators, hubs and associations
 Strong linkages in relevant conferences, workshops and seminars, for example Connected Summit organised by ICT Authority and 

Ministry in charge of ICT.

Implementation
Growth

 Significant number of start-ups and established businesses offering new services and products based on the EDT/X-Data especially in 
the agricultural, education, financial, health, manufacturing and transport sectors;

 Facilitative governance and regulatory framework which has room for improvement in key areas of capacity building, data collection 
and sharing, incentives and funding, public private partnerships, intellectual property, and sensitisation;

 Extensive infrastructure (mobile and fibre networks, data centres, under-sea cable connections) supporting deployment of the 
technologies.

The emerging  technologies  maturity
model defines three developmental stages.
The  ideation  stage  is  beyond  basic
research,  testing  fundamental  principles
and is characterized by R&D activities with
pilots and proof-of-concepts performed on
potential  commercial  applications.  The
nascent stage embodies early development
and formation of the ecosystem. Finally, in
the  growth  stage,  the  commercial
applications of the technology start gaining
strong  acceptance  in  the  market  with
increased demand and new entrants; and
the ecosystem governance structures  are

becoming  clearer.  Table  2  presents
indicators  metrics  for  the  three maturity
stages. 

Summary of Findings
The  EDT/X-Data  ecosystem  in

Kenya was assessed to be at the Growth
Stage  of  maturity.   With  reference  to
Table  3,  all  the  fundamental  activities
were assessed to be in the growth stage
except  research,  assessed to  be in  the
nascent stage.

Identified Challenges
(a) Inadequate  funding  to  support  R&D

activities  in  universities  and  research
institutions.  Public  spending  on  R&D
has particularly been reducing owing to
budget cuts towards public institutions.

(b) Shortage of the necessary infrastructure
such as High Perfor-mance Computing
for processing big data

(c) Inability  to  access  data  coupled  with
inadequate implementation of  the data
protection  laws  and  regulations  to
assure privacy

©2023 Authors
Strengthening the Emerging Digital Technologies Ecosystem in Kenya

2



(d) Low IP protection resulting from limited
awareness and associated costs.

(e) Inadequate  utilization  and  commer-
cialization  research outputs.

Policy 
Recommendations
 Promote  training of individuals in data

science  and  analytics,  machine
learning,  and  other  related  fields  is
required   to  build  a  skilled  workforce
capable  of  developing  and  analysing
EDTs/X-Data.

 Regulate  the  collection,  sharing,  and
use  of  data,  including  real-time  data,
open  data,  and  user-generated  data,
that  ensure  compliance  with  existing
data protection laws and regulations to
maximize  its  benefits  to  stakeholders,
while  ensuring  privacy  and
confidentiality. 

 Incentivize  the  adoption  and  use  of
EDTs  and  X-Data,  including  the
provision of funding or tax incentives for
stakeholders  who  invest  in  these
technologies,  as  well  as  the
establishment  of  prizes  or  awards  for
innovation and best practices in the use
of EDTs and X-Data. 

 Simplify  the   steps  involved  in  IP
protection  as  well  as  sensitization  of
researchers, innovators on the benefits
of IP. 

 Promote  public-private  partnerships
that  support  the  development  and
application  of  EDTs  and  X-Data,
including  the  development  of  joint
initiatives  between  government
agencies,  private  sector  companies,
and civil society organizations, as well
as  the  establishment  of  regulatory
frameworks  and  standards  to  guide
these partnerships.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by UKAID through
the  Research  and  Innovation  Strength-
ening in Africa (RISA) Fund .

References
Garousi,  V,  Felderer,  M,  Mantyla,  V,

(2016)  “The  Need  for  Multi-Vocal
Literature Reviews with Grey Literature”,
Proceedings  of  the  20th  International
Conference  on  Evaluation  and
Assessment in Software Engineering,  p.
26, ACM.

Liu,  X  and  White,  S  (2001),
“Comparing  innovation  systems:  a
framework  and  application  to  China’s
transitional context”, Research Policy, 30,
1091-114.

Ogawa,  R  and  Malen,  R,  (1991)
“Towards  Rigour  in  Reviews  of  Multi-
Vocal  Literatures:  Applying  the
Exploratory Case Study Method”  Review
of Educational Research, 61(3):265-286.

Ogot,  M.,  Halin,  R.,  Muthee, M.,  Kelly,
W.,  Njuguna,  S.  and  Muriuki,  R.   (2023)
Maturity  of  the  Emerging  Digital
Technologies  Ecosystems  in  Kenya  and
South Africa.

Oxford  Insights  and  IDRC  (2020).
Government Artificial Intelligence Readiness
Index 2020. 

Oxford  Insights  and  IDRC  (2021).
Government Artificial Intelligence Readiness
Index 2021.

Pawelke, A.,  Cañares, M., Hernandez,
K.,  and  Martin,  P.P.  (2017)   Data  for
development: What’s next? GIZ.

Authors
Prof Madara Ogot
University of Nairobi
madaraogot@uonbi.ac.ke

Margaret Muthee
Chief Analyst
National Commission for Science, 
Technology and Innovation
mwamuyum@gmail.com 

Samuel Njuguna
Statistics, Research and M&E Expert
samkups09@gmail.com

Rita Muriuki
Project Management Specialist
University of Nairobi
ritankatha08@gmail.com

©2023 Authors
Strengthening the Emerging Digital Technologies Ecosystem in Kenya

3


