
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
Regulation of the engineering profession
is critical in developing and safeguarding
the nation’s  infrastructural  systems.  The
regulation  of  engineering  education
through separate legal provisions of both
the Commission for University Education
(CUE) and Engineering Board of  Kenya
(EBK)  resulted  in  uncoordinated  and
sometimes  contradicting  directives.  The
attempt  by  the  University  (Amendment)
Act  No.  48 2016,  which  was upheld  by
the High Court ruling of 2020, to resolve
the  duality  by  vesting  the  mandate  for
accreditation of programmes on CUE has
created  gaps  in  the  regulation  of  the
engineering  profession.  This  policy  brief
traces  regulation of  university  education
in  Kenya,  identifies  the  regulatory  gaps
and suggests mitigation measures.

Development of Regulation
of  University  Education  in
Kenya
The  first  seven  public  universities  in
Kenya were established under individual
Acts of  Parliament that allowed for  self-
regulation  through  university  organs
headed  by  the  Senate,  and  external
regulation  by  the  responsible
Government  Ministry.  Emergence  of
private  universities  necessitated  reforms
for  a  regulatory  framework  leading  to
establishment  of  the  Commission  for
Higher  Education  (CHE)  under
Universities Act Cap 210B of 1985. The
increasing  number  of  public  universities
and the cumbersome process of enacting
Acts of Parliament for each university led
to enactment of the University Act No. 42
of  2012.  The  Act  established  CUE  to
regulate university education in Kenya. 
CUE has a wide mandate that  includes
promoting,  setting  standards,  monitoring
and  evaluating  the  state  of  university
education  systems  and  accrediting
university programmes. The Commission
regulates university education using three
legal tools, namely: 

1. The Universities Act, No. 42 of 2012,
revised 2013;

2. The  Universities  Regulations  of
2014;

3. The  Universities  Standards  and
Guidelines of 2014.

Because of the unique nature and roles
of professions such as medicine, law and
engineering, their education requires the
safeguards of close monitoring by peers.
Accordingly, Acts of Parliament setting up

regulatory  boards,  such  as  the  EBK,  and
mandated them to regulate the training of
their respective professions.

Study Approach and 
Results

The Engineers Act 43 of 2011 mandated
EBK  to,  among  other  things,  accredit
engineering  programmes  in  universities,
register and license professional engineers,
and set standards for engineering practice.
EBK  regulates  the  practice  of  the
engineering profession through registration
of graduate and professional engineers and
the issuance of annual practicing licenses.
Registration  of  Graduate  Engineers  relies
on possession of a Bachelors Degree from
an accredited engineering programme. 

Section  7(l)  of  the  Act  explicitly
mandated the EBK to regulate engineering
education in Kenya.  The University  Act  of
2012,  while  establishing  CUE  to  regulate
university education, was silent on the prior
mandates of professional bodies to regulate
education of various professions. Attempts
by  both  CUE  and  professional  bodies  to
carry out their mandates separately resulted
in  contradicting  requirements  on  the
teaching institutions. On several occasions,
boards for regulations of professions halted
the  teaching  of  CUE  accredited
programmes.

 

Regulatory Gaps Created by
University  (Amendment)  Act
No. 48 of 2016

The  enactment  of  University
(Amendment) Act No. 48 of 2016 which was
upheld  by  a  High  Court  ruling  of  2020
sought  to  resolve  the  duality  in  the
accreditation  of  programmes.  Section  5(2)
of the Act vested the mandate for approval
and  accreditation  of  any  academic
programme in Universities  on CUE. While
section 5(3) gives CUE discretion to consult
any  relevant  body  established  by  written
law  to  regulate  related  academic
programmes,  Section  5(5)  makes  it  an
offence for any person without the authority
of  CUE  to  accredit,  recognize,  audit  or
inspect a university. 

By subjecting the regulatory role of EBK
and other professions regulatory boards to
the  discretion  of  CUE,  the  Act  created
several  gaps  in  regulation  of  professions,
including: 

1. Lack  of  assurance  that  graduates
seeking registration have had requisite
academic training 

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Education and Training

Mitigating Engineering Profession 
Regulatory Gaps
Dr Peter K. Ndiba

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

73

Regulation of engineering 
education by both 
Commission for University 
Education and Engineering 
Board of Kenya resulted in 
uncoordinated directives. 

The University (Amendment) 
Act No. 48 of 2016 that 
sought to address the duality 
by vesting accreditation 
mandate on CUE, created 
gaps in the regulation of the 
engineering profession that 
require mitigation.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

2. Lack of specialized Standards in CUE
whereby engineering is categorized in
the  Universities  Standards  and
Guidelines  under  the  broad  applied
sciences field.

3. Lack  of  mandate  to  incorporate
professional  objectives  in  academic
programmes

4. Inability  to  enforce  international
obligations  for  mutual  recognition
agreements  that  are  essential  for
mobility  of  engineers  to  other
jurisdictions

The  training  of  engineers  faces  many
challenges  including  multiplicity  of
institutions  offering  engineering  education
that may be difficult to monitor and control;
competition  for  paying  students  that
compromise admission criteria, and a lack
of  qualified  instructors.  These  challenges
risk  achievement  of  quality  and  require
mitigation. 

Development of Mitigation 
Measures

Despite  the  Universities  Amendment
Act of 2016 vesting accreditation mandate
for  engineering  education  on  CUE,  EBK
should endeavour to play an active rather
than  passive  role  in  ensuring  that
graduates  engineers  entering  the
profession gain requisite qualifications. The
role  may  include adopting  a  collaborative
approach  to  the  mandate  of  CUE  but
ultimately  development  on  its  own
safeguard  measures.  In  the  US,  for
example,  engineering  graduates  are
required  to  sit  for  Fundamentals  of
Engineers’  Examination  administered  by
the  National  Council  of  Examiners  for
Engineering  and  Surveying  (NCEES),
before  joining  the  engineering  profession
as  Trainee  Engineers  (Texas  Board  of
Professional Engineers, 2020).

Given  the  challenges  of  regulating
engineering  education  and  the  need  to
safeguard the practice of engineering, EBK
should consider developing similar tools for
vetting  of  graduate  engineers.
Administering  a  graduate  engineers’
registration  examination  would  have
threefold benefits, namely,

1. Safeguard  the  practice  of  engineering
professions from unqualified graduates.

2. Motivate universities to improve their
programmes and quality of students to
support  the  registration  of  their
graduates.

3. Cause students  to take their  studies
seriously.

 
The  suggested  examination  is  a

threshold  examination  aimed  at
objectively  locking out  those who fail  to
meet  the  minimum  qualifications.
Provision should be made for assistance
in preparation for the examination and for
retakes.  Because  the  suggested
examination  is  postgraduate  and  not  a
replica of the learning process, it should
assess  the  attainment  of  the  expected
learning  outcomes  of  engineering
education; namely, knowledge, skills and
attitudes. 

Pollard et al. (2010) and Hundley and
Brown (2013) elaborated these attributes
as: 

1. Basic  knowledge  of  engineering
sciences,  mathematics,  socio-
economics  and  information  tech-
nology.

2. Engineering  competencies  in
conceptualization,  design,  construc-
tion,  manufacture,  operation  and
maintenance of  structure,  processes
and systems.

3. Communicate  technically  through
design  reports,  presentations,
drawings and specifications.

4. Understand  the  execution  of
engineering projects.

5. Flexibility  to  innovate  by  developing
sustainable solutions  through critical
thinking and creativity.

6. Conscious  of  the  impacts  of
engineering  decisions  on  economic,
environment,  health  and safety,  and
social and cultural aspects of society

7. Bound  to  ethical  conduct  and
professionalism.

8. Commitment to lifelong learning

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Creation of an office at EBK for liaison

with  the  Commission  for  University
Education.

 Establishment  of  a  pool  to  resource
persons  from  industry  to  participate
review of engineering curricula.

Medium-Term
 Institution  of  a  Graduate  Registration

Examination  for  engineering  graduates
joining the profession. 

 Development of guidelines and minimum
requirements  in  the  training  of
engineers.

References
Hundley S and Brown L.G (2013). The

Attributes  of  a  Global  Engineer  Project:
Updates,  Inputs,  Faculty  Development
Considerations.  American  Society  of
Engineering Education. ASEE International
Forum, Paper ID # 8302.

Pollard, D, Best R, Bonner D, Chinn R.
(2010).  Subject  benchmark  statement:
Engineering. The Quality Assurance Agency
for Higher Education ISBN 978 1 84979 224
0.

Republic  of  Kenya  (2009).  The
Engineers  Registration  Act  Chapter  530.
Laws  of  Kenya.  National  Council  for  Law
Reporting. Revised Edition 2009 [1992].

Republic  of  Kenya  (2011).  Engineers
Act  No.  43  of  2011.  Laws  of  Kenya.
National  Council  for  Law  Reporting.
Revised Edition 2012 [2011].

Republic  of  Kenya  (2012).  The
Universities  Act,  2012.  Kenya  Gazette
Supplement  No.  192 (Acts  No.  42)  1851-
1914.

Texas Board of Professional Engineers
(2017).  https://engineers.texas.gov/
lic_exams.htm.  (Downloaded  7th
September, 2020).

Authors
Dr. Peter K. Ndiba 
(pkndiba@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Civil and Construction 
Engineering
University of Nairobi, Kenya 

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

74


