
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Context
Agriculture  provides  the  livelihood  for  80%  of
Kenya’s  rural  population.   As  the  population
increases,  per  capita  land  available  for  farming
reduces  as  more  land  is  used  for  homesteads.
This threatens the livelihood of those who depend
on agriculture.  Kenya's population has increased
from 10.9 million in 1969 to 47.6 million in 2019
(KNBS, 2019). As a result, arable land per person
has reduced by 71.4% from 0.42 ha. (1.04 acres)
in 1961 to 0.12 ha (0.30 acres) in 2016, and the
trend is continuing (World Bank, 2020). The free-
hold land tenure system that allows landowners to
utilize their  land without user and use restriction,
sub-division of  land for  inheritance among heirs,
scattered patterns of rural settlement that rests on
inefficient  utilization  of  the  land  resource  and
unplanned  agricultural  production  are  worsening
human problems from land fragmentation. 

Overall,  these  are  a  threat  to  food  and
livelihood  security.  Fragmentation  of  agricultural
land is associated with the decline of production in
the sector.  This  study examined the relationship
between  the  inter-generational  subdivision  of
agricultural  land  and  its  impacts  on  food  and
livelihood  security  in  fifteen  rural  farming  sub-
locations  covering  eight  counties:  Kisii,  Kiambu,
Kirinyaga, Embu, Tranzoia, Nyandarua, Machakos
and Makueni.

Approach and Results
A survey was conducted in fifteen rural sub-

locations in Kenya in 2018 and 2019. The purpose of
the  study  was  to  (a)  establish  the  current  rural
household land size, (b) determine the existing land
uses and the impacts they had on food and livelihood
security, (c) identify factors contributing to the existing
land size  and use,  (d)  determine inter-generational
land-size  change,  and  (e)  propose  planning
interventions for sustainable use of agricultural land.
The target population was all farmers in the selected
sub-locations  and  the  relevant  key  informants
including  agricultural  officers,  physical  planners,
chiefs, assistant-chiefs, and community leaders. Data
was  collected  through  household  interviews  and
focus  group  discussions.  Field  observations  were
also conducted to cross-check data from households
and key informants.

The survey revealed that the average rural
household land size varied from 0.97 to 6.70 acres
with an average of 2.47 acres. The dominant land use
was the growing of  cash crops  with no clear  food,
livestock and agroforestry strategy. Households with
larger  land  sizes  were  more  food  secure  and  had
higher incomes than those with small land sizes. Lack
of  affordable  agricultural  inputs  and  extension
services and disorganized markets emerged as the
key  challenges.  The  most  influential  factor  on
household  land  size  was  the  number  of  sons  a
household had as the land is sub-divided among the
sons. Only a small fraction of daughters inherited land
from their parents. Unmarried daughters shared the

Key Messages

Series F – Land Reforms – Globally Competitive and Sustainable Land Management.

Managing Fragmentation of 
Agricultural Land for Livelihood 
Security in Kenya 
 Dr Fridah W Mugo, Prof Elijah Ndegwa and Prof Isaac K Mwangi

Rural agricultural land size is  
rapidly diminishing due to 
sub-division among heirs 
and is a threat to food and
livelihood security. 

Every farming system should 
have a minimum 
household land size 
based on ecological 
potential, type of 
enterprise and household 
needs.

Clustered (nucleated) and 
high-rise human 
settlements should be 
encouraged in rural areas 
to conserve agricultural 
land and reduce the cost 
of infrastructure.

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

63



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

 land allocated to their parents or were only allocated
living quarters on their parents’ land. 

Land  use  is  mainly  determined  by  agro-
ecological  potential  and  government  policy  in  the
case  of  irrigated  agriculture.  Household  land  size
reduction  from  fathers  (generation  1)  to  sons
(generations  2)  varied  from  60%  to  95%  with  an
average  rate  of  77%.  If  the  current  fathers
(generation  2)  subdivide  land  among  their  sons
(generation 3) equally, the average household land
size shall reduce by 1.90 acres to 0.57 acres, a 70%
reduction  between  generation  2  and  3.  This  has
serious implications in further worsening household
food  and  livelihood  security  for  the  rural  farming
populations. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Each  county  should,  in  collaboration  with  the

national  government,  research  institutes  and
universities,  work  out  a  minimum  agricultural
land  size  that  can  sustain  an  average  rural
household  in  different  farming  systems.  The
minimum  land  size  should  accommodate  one
key item each of food crop, cash crop, livestock
and  agroforestry  enterprise  and  further  sub-
division prohibited.

 The government should initiate a long-term land
banking  programme in  each  county  to  acquire
land for long-term leasing to persons 20 years or
older with no land to farm, for a maximum of 55
years and farmers should retire from farming at
the age of 75 years.

 Agricultural  land  should  be  zoned  and
designated for  specific planned production with
agro-industries for  value addition and local  and

external  marketing  strategies  of  the  farm
produce  to  optimize  returns  to  value  chain
actors.

 Promote voluntary  land pooling where family
members  can  voluntarily  agree  to  work  on
family  land  as  a  single  production  unit  and
each family member receives shares of returns
based on their initial land sizes.

 Cooperatives  should  be  strengthened  to
coordinate agricultural production, provision of
enterprise-specific  extension  services  for
optimal yields, the supply of agricultural inputs,
support  processing  of  agricultural  produce,
provision of credit services and timely payment
of the farmers for delivered produce. 

Medium to Long-Term
 Promote  voluntary  land  consolidation  where

siblings can voluntarily sell land to each other
and  neighbours  to  neighbours  to  promote
attaining of the agreed minimum land size in
the different farming systems.

 The county governments should purchase land
in  strategic  market  centres  and  promote
cluster  high-rise  housing  settlements  with
adequate social and physical infrastructure to
ensure  decent  living  for  rural  farmers,
preservation  of  agricultural  land,  and
accommodation  of  the  expected  rapid
urbanization.

 Create  a  Rural  Housing  Fund  to  support
farmers to purchase decent affordable houses
in  clustered high-rise  nodal  settlements.  The
repayment  to  be  organized  around  farming
enterprises and agricultural  income cycles of
the purchasers, be they monthly, seasonally or
annually through their cooperatives.

 The  government  should  create  a  Farmers’
Pension Fund for  farmers to which they  can

contribute,  monthly,  seasonally  or  annually  for
support during retirement.

Acknowledgement
Information  for  this  policy  brief  has  been

extracted from 15 Masters Thesis on “The Impact of
Land sub-division on Food and Livelihood Security in
Rural Kenya. We acknowledge the supervisors: Dr M,
Ng'ayu, Dr J. Ayonga; Dr S. Obiero, Dr E. Wamuciru,
Dr R. Musyoka; Planner H. Nzainga; Prof. G. Ngugi
and the team of  M.A (Planning)  Students  of  2018-
2020, Department of  Urban and Regional  Planning;
University  of  Nairobi:  H.Kioko;  M.Ngina;  M.Kinyua;
D.Songoro; C.Ayodo; E.Mueni; J.Mutuku; C.Katuma;
N.Kagwe; C.Sang; V.Chepkemoi; V.Were; S.Ngigi; R.
Njue; and D.Nekesa.

References
World  Bank  (2020).  Kenya  Arable  Land  1961-

2020.
Kenya  National  Bureau  of  Standards  (2019).

2019  Kenya  Population  and  Housing  Census.
Government Printers, Nairobi, Kenya.

Author
Dr FridahW. Mugo
(mugo@unobi.ac.ke)
Department of Urban and Regional Planning
University of Nairobi
Prof. Elijah Ndegwa
(endegwa544@gmail.com)
P.O. Box 74505-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.
Prof. Isaac K. Mwangi
(imkaranja@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Urban and Regional Planning
University of Nairobi
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

64


