
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Mature African catfish, Clarias Gariepinus, 
from a farm in Kenya
(Photo: Author)

Context
African catfish,  Clarias Gariepinus,  is an
important  farmed  food  fish  species  in
Kenya. It is also used as live bait to catch
Nile perch in Lake Victoria using longline
hooks and so increases food and nutrition
security,  income  and  national
development.  The  daily  demand  of  3
million  live  bait  samples  required  by
fishermen  on  the  Kenyan  side  of  Lake
Victoria is largely unmet by hatchery and
fish  farms.  This  is  mainly  because  of
inadequate  supply  of  quality  seeds  for
use  by  farmers  to  stock  their  ponds
(Rasowo et al., 2007) and for fishermen
in Lake Victoria to use as live bait for Nile
perch.  Limited  availability  and supply  of
farm-raised catfish seeds are due to poor
survival of catfish fry (Sulem et al., 2006),
with farmers losing up to 99.8 per cent of
the  seed  material   (Hogendoorn,  1980)
mainly due to use of poor quality brood
stock of unknown ancestry (Barasa et al.,
2014)  and poor  husbandry  practices  by
farmers (Musa et al., 2012; Barasa et al.,
2017).  This  occasions  low  annual
average production of farmed catfish. 

Consequently,  fish  farmers  and  bait
traders collect catfish seeds from natural
habitats. This is environmentally unfriend-
ly and increases exploitation pressure on 

seeds  from  the  natural  habitats  to  health
risks.  Additionally,  the  quality  of
catfishnatural  populations  of  catfish,  and
exposes  fishermen  collecting  catfish
collected  from  the  natural  habitats  is  not
assured, requisite numbers are not met in a
reasonable  time,  and  the  practice
constitutes  a  loss  of  income  by  catfish
hatchery operators and farmers as well.
In contrast,  artificial  propagation of  catfish
at hatcheries reduces exploitation pres-sure
on  natural  populations  of  indigenous  fish
species of the Lake Victoria basin (Kaufman
and  Ochumba,  1993),  generates  income
and  livelihood  oppor-tunities  for  farmers
(Barasa et al., 2017; Mkumbo and Mlaponi,
2007)  as  well  as  guarantees  quality  and
adequate numbers of seeds. 

Identification  and  isolation  of  high-quality
catfish brood stock for use at hatcheries in
artificial  propagation  in  combination  with
improved husbandry for resultant fry could
be  a  suitable  strategy  to  increase  the
availability  of  farm-raised catfish  seeds  to
support expanded aquaculture in Kenya. To
maintain  the  quality  of  such  brood  stock,
nuclei  hatcheries should be developed,  to
manage this stock. Such hatcheries will be
charged with artificial propagation of catfish
larvae  for  sale  to  farmers,  who  should
consistently  maintain  best  management
practices on their farms.

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Agriculture and Livestock

Enhancing Sustainability in African 
Catfish Seed Supply for Improved 
Production in Kenya
 Dr James Barasa

Farmed catfish production is 
low due to poor survival 
of fry (larvae) reducing 
seed availability, forcing 
search  for seeds from 
natural sources

Increases exploitation 
pressure on natural 
populations, exposes 
fishermen to health risks

Careful choice and  
management  of catfish 
brood stock and improved
husbandry could increase
survival of fry and seed 
availability for farmers.

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

5



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Approach and Results
The  culture  of  C.  gariepinus  in  Kenya  is
poorly  organized,  with  the  sourcing  of
seeds  from  the  natural  (wild)  aquatic
habitats  whose  quality  is  not  known,  or
from  farmer-owned  nearby  hatcheries
whose stocks  are  of  mixed  origin,  poorly
maintained, and suffer poor genetic quality
that deprives the stocks of vigour to grow
and  survive.  Similarly,  farmers  hardly
practice  good  catfish  husbandry  on  their
farms, further reducing the quality or vigour
of  the  fish.  This  inevitably  leads  to
cannibalism among the batch of catfish fry
or  larvae,  increasing  mortality  among  the
fry  hatched  in  a  batch  resulting  in  low
annual  farmed  production  of  catfish  in
Kenya.

In a recent study, the high genetic quality of
catfish was found to correlate with higher
fitness  (Barasa,  2018).   For  instance,
catfish  from  Lakes  Victoria  and  Turkana
had higher genetic quality than those from
Lake Baringo (Barasa et  al.,  2017).   The
Lake Victoria catfish showed higher fertility
as  a  fitness  characteristic  than  Lake
Baringo  catfish.  Therefore,  farmers  will
benefit  from  using  populations  of  higher
genetic quality as a source of broodstock,
as this is likely to increase survival of fry,
and  so  achieve  sustainability  in  seed
production and availability. 

Also,  the  relationship  between  mean
relative  fertility  and  the  expected
Heterozygosity  (a  measure  of  genetic
variability) of Clarias gariepinus populations
from Lakes Victoria, Baringo and Kanyaboli
were  investigated (see Fig.  1).  The Lake
Victoria  populations  had  higher  genetic
quality  (higher  heterozygosity)  and  higher
fertility than Lake Baringo populations. High
heterozygosity  means  lots  of  genetic
variability.  Low heterozygosity means little
genetic variability that can be attributed to
forces such as inbreeding.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Ensure proper husbandry practices in

the  rearing  of  catfish  on  farms  and
hatcheries.

 Avoid  movement  of  catfish  brood
stock  and  seeds  across  drainage
basins 

Medium-Term
 Establish  and  maintain  nuclei

hatcheries  to  manage  multiplication
and distribution of quality catfish seed

 Certify  the  established  nuclei
hatcheries  to  ensure  best  practices
are used in seed multiplication. 

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this policy brief  was supported
by  the  AgriFOSE2030  Programme  and
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI)
with  financial  support  from  the  Swedish
International  Develop-ment  Agency  (SIDA).  I
hereby  thank  all  staff  of  ILRI/AgriFOSE2030
Programme,  and  my  mentor,  Dr  Geraldine
Matolla  whose  valuable  technical  support
enabled  the  development  of  this  draft  policy
brief.

References
Barasa,  J.  E.  (2018).  Genetic  diversity,

Population  structure  and  influence  on  life-
history traits. PhD thesis, University of Eldoret,
October 2018. 214 pages.

Barasa,  J.  E.,  Abila,  R.,  Grobler,  J.  P.,
Dangasuk, O. G., Njahira, M. N. and Kaunda-
Arara,  B.  (2014)  Genetic  diversity  and  gene
flow  in  African  catfish,  Clarias  gariepinus
(Burchell  1822)  from  Lakes  Victoria  and
Kanyaboli.  African Journal of Aquatic Science,
39(3): 287-293.

Barasa,  J.   E.,  Mdyogolo,  S.,  Abila,  R.,
Grobler,  J.  P.,  Skilton,  R.  A.,  Bindeman,  H.,
Njahira,  M.  N.,  Chemoiwa,  E.  J.,  Otto  G.  D.,
Kaunda-Arara  B   and  Verheyen,  E.  (2017).
Genetic diversity and population structure of the
African  catfish,  Clarias  gariepinus  (Burchell
1822)  in  Kenya:  implication  for  conservation
and  aquaculture.  Belgian  Journal  of  Zoology,
142 (2): 105-127. 

Hogendoorn,  H.  (1980)  Controlled
propagation  of  the  African  catfish,  Clarias
lazera.  III.  Feeding  and  growth  of  fry.
Aquaculture, 21: 233-241.

Kaufman,  L.  and  Ochumba,  P.  (1993).
Evolutionary  and  conservation  biology  of  cichlid
fishes  as  revealed  by  faunal  remnants  in  the
Northern  Lake  Victoria.  Conservation  Biology,  7
(3): 719-730.

Mkumbo,  O.  C.  and  Mlaponi,  E.  (2007).
Impact  of  the  baited  hook  fishery  on  the
recovering endemic fish species in Lake Victoria.
Aquatic Ecosystem Health and Management, 10
(4): 458-466.

Musa, S. M., Aura, C. M., Ngugi, C. C. and
Kundu,  R.  (2012).  The  effect  of  three  different
feed types on growth performance and survival of
Clarias gariepinus fry reared in a hatchery. ISRN
Zoology, 2012: 1-6. 
Rasowo, J., Oyoo, E. O. and Ngugi, C. C. (2007).
Effects  of  formaldehyde,  sodium  chloride,
potassium permanganate, and hydrogen peroxide
on hatch rate of African catfish, Clarias gariepinus,
eggs.  Aquaculture, 269: 271-277.

Sulem,  Y.  S.,  Tomedi,  E.  T.,  Mounchili,  S.,
Tekeng, S. and Brummet, R. S. (2006). Survival of
Clarias gariepinus fry in earthen ponds: effects of
composts and leaks. Aquaculture, 260 (1-4): 139-
144.

Figure  1:  Comparison  of  mean  relative
fertility and the expected heterozygosity (a
measure  of  genetic  variability)  of  Clarias
Gariepinus populations 

Author
Dr James Barasa  
(jbarasa@uoeld.ac.ke)
University of Eldoret
Department of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences
P.O. Box 1125-30100, Eldoret, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

6


