
Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Measuring End-User Experience in NREN 

Networks: Leveraging the Google ISP Tool

Sherinah Nakazibwe

snakazibwe@renu.ac.ug



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Overview

26th October 2023

Outline

● Network Monitoring

● RENU Network Structure

● RENU Traffic Composition

● Google ISP Portal

● Analysis

● Conclusion



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Network Monitoring

● With Internet already made affordable and available, more concern lies 

with user experience.

● Crucial in identifying  network performance issues  and their causes.

Traditional monitoring tools measure sections of the network.

Google ISP – Measures performance from the end-user device to the server.



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

RENU Network Structure

• REN – UbuntuNet Alliance

• /24 for each institution (Identity)

• GGC for enhanced performance



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

RENU Traffic Composition

Of the entire RENU traffic, 60% is Google traffic. 70% of the Google traffic is served by 

the GGC



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Google ISP Portal

The Google ISP Portal exclusively measures Google traffic 

performance.

Google is interested in the entire performance between the 

requesting end-user device and the serving infrastructure.

Google uses Autonomous System (AS) numbers to 

identify and categorize the transit provider that is 

delivering traffic. 

Cacheable traffic is served from Google Global Cache 

(GGC).



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Google ISP Portal 

Insights into traffic flows and quality of experience.



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Performance Metrics

● Goodput: The data that is successfully transferred per unit time (Mbps)

● Application Round Trip Time: The amount of time it takes for a packet to be 

sent from a source to a destination and back (ms)

● Retransmit Rate: The percentage of packets that need to be retransmitted 

because they were lost or corrupted in transit.           



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Why Retransmit Rate?

● Retransmit rate was considered the most 

important among the 3 parameters.

● Traditional tools can measure RTT and 

Goodput.

● None of the traditional tools measure retransmit 

rate.

> 50% is flagged



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Performance Analysis Process



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Google ISP Portal - Performance Analysis

Prefix based performance analysis according to Goodput, Retransmit Rate and RTT. 



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Institutional Retransmit Rate Performance 



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Retransmit Rate Vs Performance



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Retransmit Rate Vs Performance

● Reduction in retransmit rate

● Improvement in performance

● Increase in packet loss



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Hardware Limitations



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Capacity Constraints



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Conclusion

NRENs serve a critical sector of the country that is R&E and it is important that 

these networks where these rely on have good quality networks, which require 

extensive monitoring and performance measurement to the detail. 

Extensive monitoring goes beyond what the traditional tools can currently achieve.



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

Q&A



Enabling Research & Education Collaboration

THE END
Thank you for your time


	Slide 1: Measuring End-User Experience in NREN Networks: Leveraging the Google ISP Tool
	Slide 2: Overview
	Slide 3: Network Monitoring
	Slide 4: RENU Network Structure
	Slide 5: RENU Traffic Composition
	Slide 6: Google ISP Portal
	Slide 7: Google ISP Portal 
	Slide 8: Performance Metrics
	Slide 9: Why Retransmit Rate?
	Slide 10: Performance Analysis Process
	Slide 11: Google ISP Portal - Performance Analysis
	Slide 12: Institutional Retransmit Rate Performance 
	Slide 13: Retransmit Rate Vs Performance
	Slide 14: Retransmit Rate Vs Performance
	Slide 15: Hardware Limitations
	Slide 16: Capacity Constraints
	Slide 17: Conclusion
	Slide 18: Q&A
	Slide 19: THE END

