
i

FACTS ON 

GROWING AND USE 

OF EUCALYPTUS 

IN KENYA
 

September 2010

P.O. Oballa, P.K.A. Konuche, 
M.N. Muchiri and B.N. Kigomo 

K E F R I

KEN
YA

FO
RE

STRY RESEARCH
IN

STITUTE

P.O. Oballa, P.K.A. Konuche, 
M.N. Muchiri and B.N. Kigomo 

K E F R I

KEN
YA

FO
RE

STRY RESEARCH
IN

STITUTE



ii

Cover photographs (Photos by: P. Oballa)

1. Eucalyptus stand with dry twigs for domestic firewood
2. Industrial fuelwood
3. Electricity transmission poles
4. Eucalyptus plantation interspaced with natural forest for biodiversity and riparian 

conservation

@ KEFRI 2010
This publication may be produced in whole or in part and in any form for education only 
or non-profit uses without permission of the copyright holder provided acknowledgement 
is made.
                   

ISBN: 9966 -7458 - 1 - 5  

Printed by: Print Maxim P.O. Box 6657 Nairobi  00300  Tel: +254-20-2242499

Published by:
Kenya Forestry Research Institute

P.O. Box 20412 Nairobi 00200, Kenya
Tel: +254 722 157 414, +254 722 259 781/2

+254 20 2010 651/2, +254 734 251 888
Email: director@kefri.org
Website:  www.kefri.org



iii

Eucalypts are the most widely cultivated forest trees in the world.  The genus Eucalyptus 
comprises more than 900 species and various hybrids and varieties.  Most eucalypts occur 

naturally in Australia.  In Kenya, eucalypts were introduced in 1902 to provide fuelwood for 
the Kenya-Uganda railway.  Currently, eucalypts are used for fuelwood, timber, plywood, 
transmission poles, pulp, building materials, fencing posts, windbreaks and ornamentals.

Eucalypts are grown in most ecological zones in Kenya and on a variety of soils including 
infertile sands and heavy clays.  The total area under eucalypts in Kenya is about 100 000 
ha distributed in gazetted forests, and land owned by large private companies, small 
scale farmers and local authorities. The area under Eucalyptus is likely to increase as a 
result of high demand for transmission poles to cater for the ongoing expansion in rural 
electrification, and for construction, fuelwood, carbon sequestration and mitigation of the 
effects of climate change.

A ready market for Eucalyptus products has motivated farmers to grow the species to 
improve their livelihoods through increased income. However, extensive growing of 
eucalypts has generated controversy on high water use by the species and negative effects 
on soil fertility and biodiversity.  Concerns have also been expressed on adverse effects of 
growing eucalypts near water sources because of observed drying of streams, rivers and 
springs.  Nevertheless, farmers continue to grow Eucalyptus because of its fast growth and 
good economic returns.

To address these concerns, the government has recently provided guidelines on growing 
Eucalyptus trees and is presently working on a policy to guide growing of the species in 
Kenya. As a third government effort, this booklet presents important facts on growing and 
use of Eucalyptus in Kenya.  The booklet will contribute to effective growing of Eucalyptus 
with minimum adverse effect on the environment leading to increased forest cover, carbon 
storage and renewable energy, improved livelihood and creating wealth for the citizens.

Ben N. Chikamai (PhD)
Director, Kenya Forestry Research Institute

Foreword



iv

1.0  Introduction 1

2.0  Eucalyptus species planted in Kenya 1

2.1  Distribution 1

2.2  Attributes of major Eucalyptus species 3

3.0  Propagation of Eucalyptus 6

3.1  Propagation from seed 6

3.2  Vegetative propagation 7

4.0  Preparation of planting site 8

5.0  Spacing of Eucalyptus in the field 8

6.0  Planting 9

7.0  Weeding 9

8.0  Pruning 9

9.0  Thinning 9

10.0  Harvesting 10

11.0  Growth and yield 10

12.0 Regeneration of Eucalyptus through coppice management 11

13.0  Destruction of stumps 12

14.0  Pests and diseases 12

15.0  Eucalyptus and the environment 13

15.1  Eucalyptus and hydrological cycle 14

15.2  Water use by Eucalyptus 14

15.3  Effects of Eucalyptus on soil fertility 16

15.4  Allelopathy 17

15.5  Effects of Eucalyptus on biodiversity conservation 18

16.0  Costs and benefits of growing Eucalypts 20

17.0  Value of Eucalyptus in Kenya 22

18.0  Promoting Eucalyptus in Kenya 22

19.0  Conclusions and recommendations 22

References 24

Annex 1: Eucalyptus species grown in KEFRI Arboretum, Muguga 28

Table of Contents



v

List of Figures
Figure 1.  Areas where major Eucalyptus species are grown in Kenya 2

Figure 2.  Tunnels for non-mist propagation  
 8

Figure 3.  A managed young Eucalyptus grandis coppice stand   
 11

Figure 4.  Blue gum chalcid damage on stem of young eucalyptus.  
 12

Figure 5.  Eucalyptus stem attacked by Canker attack 12

Figure 6.  Eucalypts managed as fuelwood within tea estate  13

Figure 7.  Maize and beans planted on a site after clear felling of Eucalyptus 18

Figure 8.  Regeneration of undergrowth of indigenous plants in  
 Eucalyptus grandis plantation  19
 

Figure 9.  Net income of growing eucalyptus, maize and tea for 8 years 21



vi

List of Tables
 
Table 1.  Recommended areas for growing Eucalyptus species in Kenya 2

Table 2.  Eucalyptus hybrids and pure clones grown in Kenya 5
 

Table 3.  Recommended spacing and stocking of Eucalyptus plantations in Kenya 9

Table 4.  Thinning schedules of Eucalyptus plantations for production of 
 tramsmission poles, timber and plywood 10

Table 5.  Water consumed per gram of dry biomass produced for various species 15

Table 6.  Number of indigenous plant species under plantations of Eucalyptus 18

Table 7.  Cost benefit analysis for 1 ha of an on-farm Eucalyptus enterprise under 
  management for transmission poles 20
 



1

1.0 Introduction
The genus Eucalyptus is in the family Myrtacea. Globally, Eucalyptus comprises more than 
900 species and unknown number of hybrids and varieties (Boland et al., 2006). Most 
Eucalyptus species (eucalypts) occur naturally in Australia. A few species are naturally found 
in Philippines, Papua New Guinea, Indonesia and Timor. Eucalypts grow in diverse ecological 
conditions with some hardy species growing in semi-arid areas, while others are able to 
grow on marshy and swampy sites. Eucalypts also grow under a variety of soils including 
fertile loamy soils, infertile sands and heavy clays.

Eucalypts are among the most widely cultivated forest trees in the world. The major 
Eucalyptus growing countries are: China (170 million ha); India (2.5 million ha); and Brazil 
(3.7 million ha) (Davidson, 1995; Stape et al., 2001; Stape, 2002; Liu and Li, 2010; ICFRE, 
2010). In Africa, South Africa has the largest area under Eucalyptus plantations of about half 
a million hectares (Teketay, 2003). 

In Kenya, eucalypts were introduced as early as 1902. About 100 species have since been 
introduced and 83 have been planted at various times at KEFRI Arboretum, Muguga 
(Gottneid and Thogo, 1975). Out of the 83 species planted in the arboretum, only 71 have 
survived. Of these 4 are fast growing, 14 are moderate, and 53 are slow growing (Annex I). 
The aim of the initial introduction was to identify fast growing Eucalyptus species to supply 
woodfuel for the Kenya-Uganda railway. The uses of eucalypts have since increased and 
now include timber, plywood, transmission poles, pulp, building materials, fencing posts, 
rails (fitos), windbreaks, ornamentals and environmental enhancement. Eucalypts are also 
important in providing products that would otherwise be sourced from natural forests.

The total area under eucalypts in Kenya is estimated at 100 000 ha comprising: 15 000 ha 
in gazetted forests; 35 000 ha on private land owned by large companies; and 50 000 ha on 
land owned by individual farmers and local authorities in form of woodlots, ornamentals, 
boundary planting, avenue planting and scattered trees on communal land (KFS, 2009). 
Growing of eucalypts is expected to expand due to high demand for wood for renewable 
energy, carbon sequestration and mitigating climate change (Ball, 1995; Binkley and Stape, 
2004; FAO, 2009). However, it is important that when planting eucalypts, environmentally 
sensitive areas such as wetlands are excluded (Sonkoyo, 2009). Currently, most of the 
eucalypts in Kenya are grown as investments for financial gain.  Accordingly, financial 
analysis of growing eucalypts is necessary. This booklet will guide entrepreneurs on 
eucalypts to make informed decisions on how to grow the appropriate species sustainably 
and profitably.

2.0 Eucalyptus Species Planted in Kenya
2.1 Distribution
Eucalypts are grown in agro-climatic zones II, III and IV.  The major Eucalyptus growing areas 
in Kenya include Western Region, Central Rift Valley, Central Kenya, parts of Eastern and the 
Coastal regions (Figure 1). 



2

Table 1. Recommended areas for growing Eucalyptus species in Kenya

Figure 1. Areas where major 
Eucalyptus species are 
grown in Kenya

Although the genus Eucalyptus is spread across diverse ecological conditions, various 
species thrive under different altitude and rainfall regimes. The recommended areas for 
growing various Eucalyptus species in Kenya are shown in Table 1.

Species Altitude 
(m) 

Minimum 
annual rainfall 

(mm) 

Recommended areas for planting 

E. grandis 1400-2200 1000 Greater districts of Bungoma, 
Kakamega, Trans Nzoia, Uasin 
Gishu, Nandi, Kericho, Kisii, Nyeri, 
Kiambu 

E. saligna 1600-2500 

E. globulus 2000-3000 1000 Molo, Nyandarua  
E. regnans 2500-3000 1000 South Kinangop, Molo, Timboroa, 

Londiani 
E. paniculata 1600-2000 

 
1000  Nairobi, Nakuru, Nanyuki 

E. maculata Nyeri, Nairobi, Nakuru, Nanyuki 
E. camaldulensis Up to1400 600 Dry areas of Nyanza, Coast, semi-

arid lowlands 
E. citriodora 1200-2000 1000 Lower areas of Nyanza, Nakuru, 

Nyeri, Nanyuki 
E. urophylla Up to1400 1000 Coast, Meru, Lower Nyanza  
Eucalyptus 
hybrids 

Up to1700 750 Coast, Lower Nyanza, Mid-Eastern, 
Lower Western 

 

Mombasa

Malindi

Lamu

Garissa

Tana River

Kitui

Machakos

Mt Kenya

Nan
yu

ki

Nairobi

Makuweni

Kajiado

Taita Taveta

Samburu
Isiolo

Wajir

Mandera

Moyale

Marsabit

Lake TurkanaTurkana

Mt. Elgon

Migori

Narok

Baringo

Kakamega

Kisumu

Nakuru Kericho

Nyahururu

Thika

Muranga

Nyeri

Embu

L. Victoria

Indian 
OceanE. camaldulensis

E. globulus, E. regnans

E. grandis,  E. regnans,  
E. paniculata,   E. maculata

KEY:

Species distribution



3

2.2 Attributes of major Eucalyptus species
The main Eucalyptus species grown in Kenya are ; Eucalyptus grandis, E. saligna, E. camaldulensis 
and E. globulus. Other species planted on small scale are E. regnans, E. paniculata, E. maculata 
(presently renamed Corymbia maculata) and E. citriodora (presently renamed Corymbia 
citriodora). Eucalyptus hybrids are also now planted widely in the country (Muchiri et al., 
2005; RELMA, 2006). Attributes of major Eucalyptus species are described below:

Eucalyptus grandis Maiden (Rose gum)
Eucalyptus grandis is a straight fast-growing tree, that can grow to a height of up to 50 m 
and diameter at breast height (dbh) of 2 m. Occasionally, the species is morphologically 
confusing due to frequent mixtures of hybrids formed between E. grandis and E. saligna. 
In Kenya, the species has high growth rate in the highlands, where altitude ranges from 
1400 to 2200 metres above sea level (m.a.s.l.) and mean annual rainfall above 900 mm. The 
species prefers moist well-drained soils, but grows in a wide range of soil types (FAO, 1979). 
It has few noted diseases and pests. However, it is sensitive to frost and drought (NAS, 1980). 
Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI) through re-introduction, selection and breeding, 
has developed fast-growing straight trees that attain mean annual volume growth of 
above 45 m3ha-1yr-1 and height growth of 5 m yr-1 at age 3 to 5 years (Oballa and Giathi, 
1996).  Eucalyptus grandis is mainly grown for transmission poles, pulpwood, domestic and 
industrial woodfuel, and is increasingly becoming a timber species.

Eucalyptus saligna SM (Blue gum)
Eucalyptus saligna is a straight tall tree that grows to a height of 40-50 m and dbh of 1.5 m. 
Occasionally, it attains a height of 70 m. In Kenya, E. saligna grows between altitude of 1600 
to 2500 m.a.s.l., but performs better in areas above 2200 m.a.s.l. with cool climate (Maundu 
and Tengnas, 2005). Under these climatic conditions, the growth is faster than that of E. 
grandis. The heartwood is pink to red and moderately durable and easy to work. The species 
is widely used for poles, posts, timber, pulpwood, furniture, veneer and shelterbelts. 

Eucalyptus camaldulensis  Dehnh  (River red gum)
Eucalyptus camaldulensis originates from most of the Australian mainland. This species 
grows to height of 40 m and dbh of 2 m (NAS, 1980). It has wide-spreading branches and 
flaky bark. Trees from tropical north of Australia are usually slender-stemmed and up to 
25 m tall, with erect or bent pink, cream, or white bole. Those from the sub-tropical south 
have thick-bark. Some provenances of this species are often crooked with weeping branches. 
The species has marked morphological variations as witnessed in trees grown in Kenya. In 
Kenya, E. camaldulensis grows from sea level to an altitude of 2200 m.a.s.l. (Maundu and 
Tengnas, 2005). 

The best performance in growth is obtained at lower elevations below 1400 m.a.s.l. with 
mean annual rainfall of 600 to 1000 mm. It has the ability to survive on relatively poor 
saline soils and in areas with prolonged dry seasons. Trees from various E. camaldulensis 
provenances have shown remarkable variation in growth performance (Eldridge et al., 
1994; Maua, 1997). Through re-introduction, selection and breeding, Kenya has developed 
fast-growing straight trees that attain annual height growth of 4 m. The red heartwood of 



4

mature E. camaldulensis trees is hard, durable and relatively resistant to termites. The tree 
is used for poles, posts, construction timber, woodfuel, ornamental, shade, windbreak and 
swamp reclamation as it tolerates waterlogging.

Eucalyptus globulus Labill (Tasmanian blue gum)
Eucalyptus globulus originates from South-eastern Tasmania and Southern Victoria in 
Australia. The trees are tall, straight, and attain a height of 70 m and dbh of 2 m under 
favourable climatic and site conditions. The tree bark is rough, deeply furrowed, gray and 
persistent at the base of the trunk. Above the base, it sheds the bark in strips leaving the 
branches and the greater length of the trunk smooth-barked. 

The species is called blue gum because of conspicuously broad blue-gray juvenile leaves. 
Mature leaves are narrow, sickle-shaped and dark shining green with a menthol scent when 
crushed. In Kenya, it grows well in highlands above 2000 m.a.s.l. (Maundu and Tengnas, 
2005). However, Gonoptera beetles often attack E. globulus and this has led to its reduced 
planting in some areas. The light yellowish brown heartwood of mature trees is hard, heavy, 
strong and moderately durable. The wood is used for poles, posts, veneer and timber. Young 
leaves are blue-grey and produce pale-yellow oil that is used in making of pharmaceutical 
products, perfumery and soap. The species is also used as bee forage, windbreak and 
ornamental. 

Eucalyptus urophylla  Blake  (Timor mountain gum or Timor white gum) 
Eucalyptus urophylla is a moderately large tree that can attain a height of 50 m and diameter 
of 2 m on favourable sites. The bole is straight and clear up from half to two-thirds of tree 
height. There is considerable variation within the species in terms of rough bark retention 
which ranges from partial to full bole. The species has a pinkish stem. Some varieties have 
thick soft corky bark. In Kenya, experimental trials have shown that the species is suitable 
for Coast, Nyanza and Eastern Provinces, in areas with mean annual rainfall of 1000 mm. The 
species seeds better in high altitude areas (above 2000 m.a.s.l.) but growth and tree form is 
poor at such altitudes.  Eucalyptus urophylla is used for transmission poles, posts, pulpwood, 
fuelwood and construction timber.

Eucalyptus citriodora  Hook (Lemon scented gum)
Eucalyptus citriodora (synonym Corymbia citriodora) occurs naturally in Central and Northern 
coasts of Queensland, Australia. It grows to about 45 m in height and a dbh of 1.3 m. It 
has attractive white, red, or faintly bluish bark. It has adapted to cultivation in a number of 
countries with widely differing climate and soil types. Because of its fast growth, excellent 
bole form, and good timber quality, the species is increasingly being cultivated (NAS, 1980). 
The leaves have lemon scent hence the species is grown for perfumery oil. It has also been 
grown for fuelwood at various experimental sites by KEFRI. Some farmers, especially in Kano 
plains, have planted the species for domestic and commercial use in construction, fuelwood 
and poles for scaffolding. 

Eucalyptus maculata  (Hook) K.D Hill & L. A. S. Johnsun (Spotted gum)
Eucalyptus maculata (synonym Corymbia maculata) originates from eastern Australia. It is a 
tall tree that attains a height of 40 m and dbh of over 1.2 m. It has similar characteristics as 



5

Table 2. Eucalyptus hybrids and pure clones grown in Kenya

Eucalyptus clones Variety
Eucalyptus grandis x Eucalyptus

(GCs)
CC 3, GC 10, GC 12, GC 14, GC 15, GC 167,
GC 514, GC 540, GC 581, GC 584, GC 642, GC
784, GC 785, GC 796

Eucalyptus grandis x Eucalyptus
urophylla (GUs)

GU 7, GU 8, GU 21

Others TAG 5 (pure E. grandis clone)

camaldulensis

E. citriodora, but its leaves lack the lemon scent. It grows in dry highland areas and provides 
good shade in pasturelands. The wood is heavy, strong, tough and moderately durable. The 
species has been used for railway line sleepers due to its high density. Eucalyptus maculata 
is also used for shelterbelts, as ornamental and for timber.

Eucalyptus paniculata  SM  (Grey iron bark gum) 
The species origin is New South Wales in Australia. It grows to a height of 30-35 m and 
produces straight stems and therefore a good species for production of poles. It is hardy 
and more suited to dry highland sites. Its rate of growth is lower than that of E. grandis and 
E. saligna. The mature wood is strong and resistant to decay. It is mainly used for poles, 
sleepers, house floors, bridge construction, fuelwood and charcoal.

Eucalyptus regnans  F. Muell (Mountain ash)
Eucalyptus regnans originates from Tasmania and Victoria in Australia. The species attains 
a height of 100 m. Mountain ash forests are the tallest hardwood forests in the world. 
Eucalyptus regnans is not widely grown in Kenya. Trees planted in 1927 at South Kinangop 
Forest Reserve are a show-piece as the tallest trees in Kenya, with an average height of 
90 m and dbh of 2 m. Mountain ash is suitable for growing in areas with deep soil at high 
altitude ranging from 2500 to 3000 m.a.s.l. (KFD, 1996). It is a good species for sawn timber 
and pulpwood. A major disadvantage with this species is that it does not coppice (Konuche, 
1989).

Eucalyptus hybrids and clones
Eucalyptus hybrids are crosses between two different Eucalyptus species. In the late 1990s, 
Eucalyptus hybrids were introduced to Kenya from South Africa (Muchiri et al., 2005). The 
most popular hybrids are those of E. grandis crossed with E. camaldulensis (GCs).  Hybrids 
of these two species combine the fast growth of E. grandis and the drought tolerance of E. 
camaldulensis. The GC hybrids are more suited for growing in medium agricultural potential 
areas of Kenya, receiving annual rainfall above 750 mm and at an elevation of less than 1700 
m.a.s.l. The GCs are not suitable for growing in semi-arid areas where E. camaldulensis does 
best or above 1700 m.a.s.l. where E. grandis grows best. In high rainfall areas with amounts 
over 1200 mm a year, the growth rate of GCs is lower than that of widely grown local E. 
grandis (Wamalwa et al., 2007). Table 2 shows the first 12 hybrids and one pure E. grandis 
tested in Kenya. Among the 17 hybrids introduced in Kenya, those that grow best in most 
sites are GC hybrids GC 581, GC 14 and GC 15 (Oeba et al., 2009). The GC hybrids are most 
suitable for production of pulpwood, poles and posts. 



6

3.0 Propagation of Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus species are propagated from seed and through vegetative means.  Planting 
material is collected from trees with superior characteristics; tall, good form, little taper and 
healthy. 

3.1 Propagation from seed
Seed collection: Eucalyptus fruits ripen at various times of the year depending on the 
species. Seed is obtained from well-developed mature brownish capsules. The capsules are 
collected from crowns of standing trees or from felled trees during tree harvesting. There 
is usually a long interval between seed ripening and opening of the capsules, which offers 
an opportunity to plan for seed collection. Moreover, wind dispersal of seeds takes place a 
month or two after the opening of the capsules. 

The major challenge in seed collection is how to reach capsules from the tall standing trees. 
It requires trained tree climbers who can collect the capsules from tall trees. The other 
challenge is timing when most capsules are ripe as they are usually at different stages of 
development on the same branch. 

Seed extraction, cleaning and drying: After collection, the capsules are sun-dried by 
spreading them on a thin layer on tarpaulin or plastic sheets to open. The capsules are 
then threshed lightly to release seeds and unfertilized ovules that are usually referred to 
as “chaff”. The seeds are cleaned by removing large impurities such as capsules, twigs and 
leaves (Albrecht, 1993). It is not easy to separate the seed and chaff mixture by ordinary 
means and therefore the mixture is handled together after removal of large impurities. The 
seeds are further sun-dried to the required moisture content of less than 10% before storage 
or distribution. The ratio of chaff to seed varies from species to species and ranges between 
5:1 to 30:1. The number of seeds per kilogram also varies with species e.g. a kilogram of 
clean E. grandis has about 300,000 seeds, while that of E. camaldulensis has about 2 000 000 
seeds (Maundu and Tengnas, 2005).

Seed storage: After proper drying, seeds of most Eucalyptus species can be stored in 
airtight containers at room temperature for 1-2 years without significant loss of viability. 
For long-term storage, the seeds should be fumigated or treated with various pesticides 
and stored under cold temperatures, usually about 4°C, at a moisture content of 4 to 6% 
(Albrecht, 1993).

Seed sowing and germination: Seeds of most eucalypts readily germinate without any 
pre-treatment. Small sized Eucalyptus seeds are usually mixed with sand, sawdust or fine 
soil before sowing for even distribution on the seedbed. The mixture is spread thinly and 
evenly on the seedbed and covered lightly with a thin layer of fine soil. The seeds are kept 
moist by watering one to two times per day depending on prevailing weather conditions. 
Germination of most eucalypts will occur within 7 to 14 days after sowing (KFS, 2009). 
Germinating seedlings require shading to ensure that the top layers of soil on germination 
beds do not dry out. This can be achieved by placing a sheet of Hessian cloth or some 
light thatch of vegetation over the seedbed. Seedlings are pricked out into containers or 



7

Swaziland bed when they have two leaves. With proper watering and hygiene, the seedlings 
are ready for field planting after 3-5 months when they have attained a height of 30 cm and 
above. Due to sensitivity to desiccation, it is preferred that seedlings are grown in containers 
such as plastic pots and tubes. Other containers used include dry banana barks, used milk 
packets and any other appropriate containers. Seedlings that are raised in open beds (bare 
rooted seedlings), especially in low rainfall areas have high mortality after field planting. It is 
therefore important to synchronize raising of seedlings with onset of the rainy season. 

3.2 Vegetative propagation
The most commonly used method for vegetative propagation of Eucalyptus in Kenya is 
cuttings. Other methods used to a limited scale in Kenya are grafting and tissue culture. 
The vegetatively propagated materials are called clones because they are duplicated genetic 
copies of the original individuals. Eucalyptus species that are raised through vegetative 
methods include; E. grandis, E. saligna, E. camaldulensis and E. urophylla, and their hybrids. 
Hybrids can only be raised through vegetative methods, widely known as cloning. 
Caution: Tree growers are advised not to use seeds of hybrid clones to raise seedlings for 
planting. Seeds from clones will not produce the same material as the parent. 

Cuttings for propagation of Eucalyptus are obtained from seedlings of 1 to 2 years of age. 
Cuttings can also be obtained from mature trees by felling and allowing them to coppice. 
The cuttings are dipped into a rooting powder i.e. 0.8% indolebutyric acid (IBA) before 
staking into the rooting media (Mwaniki et al., 2009). The media used for rooting can be 
clay, sub-soil, sand or vermiculite. The cuttings are then staked into the beds that are wetted 
before covering with a polyethylene sheet to keep humidity high through condensation. The 
widely adopted methods of humidity control in the country are by use of plastic tunneling 
and mist propagators (Mwaniki et al., 2009). 

Tunnels are non-mist propagation structures made of translucent flexible covering such 
as polyethylene sheets as propagation chambers (Figure 2). The polyethylene sheet is 
tightly stretched over hoops, semi-circular in shape and buried at the foot of the beds in 
soil. Thorough watering is done immediately after planting the cuttings and thereafter 
high-level moisture is maintained by watering every 10 to 14 days depending on climatic 
conditions. A shade is provided over the tunnel to prevent drying of the cuttings from over-
exposure to the sun. 

Rooting of cuttings begins after 2 weeks. The rooted cuttings are transferred into containers 
and watering continued for the next 40 days as they are gradually exposed to full sunlight. 
The rooted cuttings are then maintained in the open for about 90 days when they are about 
20 cm tall and ready for transplanting in the field. 

Grafting has been used to clone desired selected parents for seed orchard development, 
but in most cases the compatibility between the root stock and the scion is poor and the 
life span of the trees tends to be short. Tissue culture of eucalypts has been successfully 
undertaken in Kenya but is only used as a starter to propagate clones that are most difficult 
to root. 



8

Figure 2. Tunnels for non-mist propagation

4.0 Preparation of Planting Site
Planting sites should be cleared and prepared well in advance of the planting date. Young 
eucalypts are sensitive to weed competition especially from grasses. It is therefore necessary 
to carry out thorough ground preparation by removing all competing vegetation, creating 
conditions to improve moisture conservation and rooting conditions for the seedling (KFD, 
1996). 

The common methods used for ground preparation are complete ploughing, strip 
cultivation or spot hoeing. The best time to carry out these operations is during the dry 
season. Complete ploughing can be carried out manually or by use of tractors. 
 
Strip cultivation is mostly practiced in rangelands and sites where some natural vegetation 
is to be conserved.  The width of the strip varies from 1 to 3 m and is spaced 10 to 30 m, 
depending on the objective of management. The strips are prepared by clearing the bushes 
and ploughing depending on the site conditions. In areas where complete or strip cultivation 
is not possible, spot hoeing can be done. 

Ground preparation can also be done using herbicides. The most widely used herbicide is  
commercially known as Round Up. This is a systemic herbicide, which is good in controlling 
actively growing weeds. Spraying of the site can be done over the whole area, in a strip or in 
spots. The rate of application varies with the density and type of weeds. In areas with dense 
grass such as Kikuyu or couch grass, the application rate of the herbicide is about 2.5 l ha-1 
but in areas with light broad-leaved weeds the application rate is lower. The planting holes 
for Eucalyptus are usually 30 cm deep with a diameter of 30 to 50 cm depending on the 
climatic and site conditions.

5.0 Spacing of Eucalyptus in the Field
Initial spacing depends on the objective of planting the eucalypts (KFD, 1996; KFS, 2009). In 
plantations for production of transmission poles and timber, the spacing is 3 x 3 m, fuelwood 
and props 2 x 2 m, and for withes and firewood for domestic use 1 x 1 m (Table 3). However, 



9

Table 3. Recommended spacing and stocking of Eucalyptus plantations in Kenya

Objective of planting Initial spacing (m) Trees per hectare 
Withies, domestic firewood 1.0 x 1.0 10 000 
Fuelwood, pulpwood 2.0 x 2.0 2500 
Fuelwood, light construction poles, 
pulpwood 

2.5 x 2.5 1600 

Transmission poles, fencing posts, light 
construction poles, timber 

2.75 x 2.75 1320 

Transmission poles, fencing posts, 
construction wood, timber, plywood 

3.0 x 3.0 1100 

 
6.0 Planting
Planting should commence following the onset of rains and wetting of the upper 30 cm 
of soil (KFD, 1996). Seedlings are planted when they are about 30 cm tall. If the seedlings 
are in polyethylene tubes, the tubes should be carefully removed before planting to avoid 
root deformity and to allow quick contact with field soil. Fertilizer applied at planting time 
improves seedling growth (Cromer et al., 1993). Replacing of dead seedlings (beating-up) 
should be done within a month or not more than six months after planting. Seedlings 
planted later than this end up being suppressed if survival is more than 70 %.

7.0 Weeding
Grass and herbaceous weeds can severely reduce growth of young Eucalyptus trees and 
should therefore be removed until tree canopy closes. Weeding can be done by spot hoeing 
1 m around trees and slashing spaces in between. Where Eucalypts are grown together with 
agricultural crops such as maize, potatoes, peas and beans, trees are weeded as the crops 
undergo weeding. However, tall crops such as maize should not be planted too close to 
trees because they shade the  young tree seedlings. 

8.0 Pruning
It is not necessary to carry out pruning in Eucalyptus plantations, as the species are self-
pruning. However, light pruning may be carried out to enhance accessibility and security. 
Large trees on farms are pruned to reduce competition with agricultural crops and other 
trees, whereas those in homesteads are pruned to enhance beauty and to minimize risks 
associated with broken branches.

9.0 Thinning
The general practice in Kenya is not to thin Eucalyptus plantations. However, it is recommended 
that plantations grown for transmission poles, timber and plywood should be thinned. The 
recommended thinning schedules for such plantations are presented in Table 4.

these spacings may vary depending on site and climatic conditions. Wider spacing is used 
in drylands. Closer spacing results in higher volume yield in early stages of growth but of 
smaller diameter trees. Large spacing of more than 4 m is usually used where eucalypts are 
to be mixed with other trees or agricultural crops.



10

Age in years Trees per hectare after thinning
Plantations for transmission
poles

Plantations for timber and
plywood

1 1320 1100
5 750 750

10 750 400
12 Clear fell 150
20 Clear fell

10.0  Harvesting
Eucalyptus are harvested for production of rails and fuelwood from 3 years; poles and 
pulp from 6 to 8 years; transmission poles from 10 to 12 years; timber from 15 to 20 years; 
and plywood from 20 to 25 years.  The stump heights should be as close to the ground as 
possible and should not exceed 10 cm in height. 

Harvesting of Eucalyptus is done using various tools depending on the age of the crop. The 
tools range from machetes (pangas), handsaws and power saws. Machetes are widely used 
for felling small trees for rails and firewood, whereas handsaws are used for cutting medium 
sized trees for poles and firewood. Power saws and axes are used for felling large trees for 
production of transmission poles, timber, plywood and fuelwood.

During harvesting, care must be taken not to damage or loosen the bark of the stumps, as 
this will interfere with coppicing. When cutting with power saws, care should be taken to 
ensure that engine oil does not spill onto the stump as this will kill them. Stumps should not 
be left covered with slash as this will obstruct the coppice shoots and may prevent them 
from growing straight.  Areas to be regenerated by coppicing should not be burnt.

11.0 Growth and Yield
Eucalypts are highly productive provided that care is taken to match the species/provenance 
to the locality, and appropriate site preparation and establishment procedures have been 
duly followed. Annual production rates in Kenya now range from 20 m3 ha-1 to over 70 m3 
ha-1  depending on the species, site quality, management, and climatic conditions (Oballa 
and Giathi, 1996). At Muguga and Turbo, KEFRI has recorded annual volume growth of  
70 m3 ha-1  and mean annual height increment of 5 m for improved E. grandis (Oballa, 1989; 
Oballa and Giathi, 1996), and 3 to 4 m for E. camaldulensis, E. regnans and E. globulus at the 
age of 3 to 4 years (Konuche, 1989; Maua, 1997). Such high rates of productivity are only 
sustainable with investments on silviculture and tree breeding research. 

There are differences in growth between hybrid clones and local landraces at various sites.  
Eucalyptus grandis х E. camaldulensis (GCs) 10, 14, 15, 522, 540, 581, 642 and E. grandis х E. 
urophyla (GU) 21 perform better in marginal agricultural areas, whereas E. grandis is superior 

Table 4. Thinning schedules of Eucalyptus plantations for production of tramsmission 
 poles, timber and plywood



11

Figure 3. A managed young Eucalyptus grandis coppice stand (Photo by: P. Oballa)

in high potential areas (Wamalwa et al., 2007). There are differences in performance among 
hybrids at various sites indicating that some hybrid clones are more adaptable to specific 
sites (Kirongo and Muchiri, 2009). Hybrid clones GCs 581, 14 and 15 have good growth 
across most sites.

12.0 Regeneration of Eucalyptus Through Coppice Management
Tending of Eucalyptus coppices is done to bring up second and subsequent generations 
of Eucalyptus. Coppices form from dormant buds on the cambium of cut trees. Coppice 
shoots, which are dominant and have the best form and good attachment to the stump, 
should be selected for retention (Kaumi, 1983).  The selected shoots should also be as low 
down the stump as possible and as wide apart as practicable. Shoots on the windward side 
should be preferred. 

The root crowns of some Eucalyptus species are lignotuberous, which enhances coppice 
production. Lignotubers are swellings at the stem base that consist of a mass of tissue which 
assist the tree to sprout in case the main stem dies. However, there are two valuable timber 
species,  E. delegatensis and E. regnans that hardly regenerate from coppices (Konuche, 1989; 
Wikipedia, 2009).

When coppices are about 6 months old they should be thinned to retain the best 4 to 6 
per stump which one year later are thinned to retain the best 2 to 3 (Dyson, 1974; Kaumi, 
1983). The resulting stocking (Figure 3) is maintained until the plantation is clear felled. 
Regeneration of Eucalyptus plantations through coppice management is recommended for 
production of rails, fuelwood and poles. However, at good sites coppices can be used for 
regeneration of plantations for production of timber and plywood. It is possible to have 4 
coppice cycles for production of rails, fuelwood and poles (Kaumi, 1983). For timber and 
plywood, 2 coppice cycles are recommended. 



12

13.0 Destruction of Stumps
After the last coppice crop has been clear-felled, stumps should either be dug out or 
killed using arboricides. Frill cuts should be made around the stumps before applying an 
arboricide. Smearing used engine oil at the cut edge can also kill the stumps. Where these 
methods prove expensive, coppice shoots should be removed repeatedly when a new crop 
is planted. Good establishment of a new crop will easily suppress the shoots from previous 
stumps leading to eventual death of the older stumps.

14.0 Pests and Diseases
In Kenya, Eucalypts have been cultivated with few reported major outbreaks of pests or 
diseases. The earliest known pests in the country are the snout beetle (Gonipterus scutellatus) 
and termites.  Leptocybe invasa (Blue gum chalcid) is another pest that has attacked eucalypts 
in the country since 2002 (Mutitu et al., 2008). 

Snout beetle has had devastating effect on E. globulus thus leading to reduced planting of 
the species. Recently, the pest has been observed on other species including; E. saligna, E. 
grandis, E. camaldulensis and a number of introduced Eucalyptus hybrids, but the effect is 
manageable. Termites are the most widespread pests attacking most Eucalyptus species in 
Kenya particularly in dry areas. Termites can be controlled through application of various 
termiticides including Regent 3G (Fipronil) at a rate of 33 g per tree at planting (Otieno et 
al., 2009). 

Attack of Eucalyptus by L. invasa (Blue gum chalcid) is more severe in dry areas of Western, 
Nyanza, Rift Valley, Coast, Central and Eastern regions of Kenya. The pest mostly attacks 
seedlings and saplings under 4 years (Figure 4). The most highly susceptible species are E. 
grandis, E. saligna, E. camaldulensis and their hybrids.  

Figure 4. Blue gum chalcid damage on stems of young 
 Eucalyptus.  (Photo by: E. Mutitu)

Figure 5. Eucalyptus stem attacked by Canker attack
 (Photo by: E. Mutitu)           

Botryosphaeria is the most widespread disease of Eucalyptus in Kenya (Mutitu et al., 2008; 
Otieno et al., 2009). It causes cankers (Figure 5), gum production and growth retardation.



13

The disease attacks E. grandis and its hybrids. The other diseases recorded on Eucalyptus 
include Mycosphaerella, which appears as black and brown spots on leaves. Mycosphaerella 
keniensis is the most widespread disease found on E. grandis, E. urophylla and E. camaldulensis. 
Powdery mildews have been observed on leaves of Eucalyptus seedlings, especially in the 
nursery. The affected leaves have a whitish coating and in severe cases the leaves curl. The 
remedy is to spray the seedlings with ridomil or milraz. Other diseases that affect Eucalyptus 
in Kenya include Phytophthora and Cylindrocladium species. The fungi attack the roots 
causing rotting. The Cylindrocladium species is also associated with cankers on young 
seedlings. The diseases are more pronounced in sites with high humidity.

15.0 Eucalyptus and the Environment
Eucalyptus species have been grown for over 100 years in Kenya and have become very 
popular with farmers. Tobacco companies and other industrial companies such as Homa 
Lime are promoting eucalypts as the “best-bet” source of renewable energy for industrial 
processing of their produce. Large tea estates also manage eucalypts for fuelwood within 
the tea farms (Figure 6). Industries such as Pan African Paper Mills and Raiply use large 
volumes of eucalypts as industrial raw material and as fuelwood. 

Figure 6. Eucalypts managed as fuelwood within tea estate (Photo by: P. Konuche)



14

In 1980s, the defunct Permanent Presidential Commission on Soil Conservation and 
Afforestation (PPCSA) discouraged planting of Eucalyptus. This campaign resulted in 
reduced planting in state forests. However, currently, there is enthusiasm in planting of 
eucalypts in areas outside state forests. Farmers grow eucalypts as reliable investment with 
good financial returns in relatively short rotations, and as sources of products for domestic 
needs. These trees cushion farmers when the markets for their agricultural produce fail or 
are low. However, concern has been that eucalypts use a lot of water, reduce soil fertility and 
are generally bad for biodiversity conservation (FAO, 1998; Sunder, 1995; FAO, 2009). Some 
information on Eucalyptus and the environment are outlined in the following sections:

15.1  Eucalyptus and hydrological cycle
Natural and plantation forests play an important role in the hydrological cycle as they 
affect evaporation, runoff and infiltration (Davidson, 1995). Forests are generally known to 
transpire more water than short rotation crops, scrub or grass. Forests with good ground 
cover or understorey plants have high rates of infiltration and therefore low runoff. High 
infiltration may, however, be reduced by activities that reduce ground cover such as 
weeding, overgrazing, burning, soil compaction, among others. Increased infiltration rates 
lead to higher soil and groundwater recharge and this increases river flow during the dry 
season. Eucalyptus species have closed and deep crowns that provide good interception 
of raindrops thus protecting the soil mantle and allowing for effective infiltration and 
groundwater recharge. 

15.2  Water use by Eucalyptus 
Few studies have been carried out in Kenya on water use by Eucalyptus. In other countries 
with large Eucalyptus plantations, studies have been carried out on water use by various 
tree species including pines. Assessments have also been conducted on the effects of land 
use change from grassland or indigenous forests to plantations of fast growing species of 
pines and eucalypts. Results showed that in high rainfall areas replacement of indigenous 
bamboo forest in water catchment with plantations of eucalypts, pine and tea did not result 
in any long-term reduction in water from the catchments. Silva et al. (2006), comparing dry 
biomass fixation of two Eucalyptus species at three levels of soil water contents (20, 23, and 
26%) found that, water use efficiency was better at higher level of soil water content at 26%. 
In dry sites, Eucalyptus adopts various mechanisms for drought avoidance including dynamic 
changes in leaf area index, near vertical arrangement of leaves, high stomata sensitivity to 
air saturation deficit, deep rooting ability and osmotic manipulation to maintain turgor in 
leaves (Kallarackal and Somen, 1997; Whitehead and Beadle, 2004). 

Several  studies capture some of the concerns of eucalypts that make them more productive 
and water use efficient. Calder et al. (1997) and White et al. (2002) reported that roots of 
Eucalyptus penetrate into deeper soil layers and are able to extract water from reservoirs 
additional to that available from the rainfall. The additional access to water was found 
to support increased growth compared to other tree species within the site. Robertson 
(2005) observed that when the eucalypts and other alien species were cleared from the 



15

Table 5. Water consumed per gram of dry biomass produced for various species

Species Total biomass produced per 
litre of water (g) 

Water consumed per gram of 
biomass (l g-1) 

Pongamia pinnata 1.13  0.88  
Syzigium cumnii 2.00  0.50  
Eucalyptus hybrid 2.06  0.48  
 

The study concluded that:
	 •	 Eucalyptus	hybrid	consumed	more	water	on	per	litre	basis,	but	produced	more		

 biomass per unit volume of water 
	 •	 Pongamia pinnata consumed the least water but produced least biomass per unit  

 volume of water. 
	 •	 Eucalyptus	hybrid	was	the	most	efficient	water	user	compared	to	the	other		 	

 species studied.
 
In another study in Central India where large-scale plantations of Eucalyptus tereticornis had 
been established, the level of water in wells declined until the plantations were 6 to 8 years 
(when trees have their maximum rate of growth) and thereafter, reverted to the earlier level. 
Similarly, adverse effects on hydrological cycle were not observed in older plantations of E. 
globulus. Cromer et al. (1993) on comparing the response of E. grandis under irrigation and 
fertility treatment found that the trees reacted favourably to additional fertility more than 
water. After three years, fertilizer treatment had significantly and substantially increased 
growth in mean height and basal area, but there was no response to irrigation and no 
interaction between fertilizer and irrigation.

river systems, the flow of the river was restored to normal within a decade, indicating that 
the ground water accumulates and springs up. Scott and Welch (1996) reported similar 
experiences with afforestation scheme with E. grandis in one site and Pinus patula in another 
site in Mokobulaan region in South Africa. In both cases, the species dried the stream after 
some years. After clear felling, the stream flow returned to normal within a period of 5 years. 
It is important to note that such large-scale clearance can have negative repercussions 
leading to dryland salinity as observed by Morgan and Barton (2008) when done with the 
hope that indigenous species will automatically colonize without silvicultural treatment. 
Munishi (2007) going by the observations at Mbeya, Tanzania, cautions that the approach 
of large scale clearance is ill advised since the sudden drastic removal of  vegetation over 
large areas on steep slopes invariably leads to increased soil erosion, landslides, and silting 
of waterways and water bodies, with increased floods on farmlands and other habitats. 

In India, Tiwari and Mathur (1993) reported that experiments were conducted to compare 
water requirements and biomass production of selected tree species. The species studied 
included  Pongamia pinnata (slow growing), Syzgium cuminnii (Mzambarau) with moderate 
growth and Eucalyptus hybrid (fast growing), among others. The results are as indicated in 
Table 5.



16

The Overseas Development Administration of the UK supported a study to understand the 
impact of fast growing species on the environment by comparing water use in plantations of 
eucalypts, indigenous forest and annual agricultural crop (Calder, 1994). The main findings 
of the study were: 

	 •	 In	the	dry	zone,	the	water	use	of	young	Eucalyptus	plantation	was	no	greater	than		
 that of indigenous dry deciduous forest; 

	 •	 The	annual	water	use	of	Eucalyptus	and	indigenous	forest	was	equal	to	annual		
 rainfall; 

	 •	 The	annual	water	use	of	either	indigenous	or	plantation	forests	was	higher	than		
 that of agricultural crops; and  

	 •	 There	was	no	evidence	of	water	abstraction	from	the	water	table	by	all	species.	

The general observations from these studies is that the effect of planted trees on ground 
water depends on the species, climatic conditions and type of soil.

15.3 Effects of Eucalyptus on soil fertility 
Few studies have been done on soil nutrient status in Eucalyptus plantations in Kenya. In 
1993, a study was carried out in Ethiopia to compare nutrient status in plantations of E. 
globulus at 40 years old, Cypress at 28 and 40 years old, and Cedar at 40 years (Teketay, 
2003). The results showed that soils under E. globulus plantations had lower nutrient content 
than soils in cedar and natural forests. The soils under E. globulus and cypress also tended 
to have lower density of mycorrhiza fungi. In natural forest, the total annual litter fall was 
about twice as high as in plantations of E. globulus. However, nutrient release in E. globulus 
plantation was comparable to that in natural forest. 

Laclau et al. (2003) studied dynamics of nutrients in short rotational clonal eucalypts and 
found that there are two growth periods. The first one is the juvenile phase up to canopy 
closure, during which the uptake of nutrient from the soil meet the requirements. The 
second phase involves intense nutrient recycling with internal translocation within trees 
supplying 30% of N and P from the second year onwards. At the end of the rotation the 
mineralization of organic matter from litter fall provided ample amounts of nutrients. Other 
studies recorded differences between the nutrient status of natural forest, savanna and that 
of cropped plantations, especially when grown on short rotations (Couto and Betters, 1995). 
In a natural forest with little disturbance nutrients are conserved and cycled between trees 
and soil. When a plantation is thinned or felled and the wood is extracted, the nutrient 
capital changes considerably because nutrients are removed from the site. Since Eucalyptus 
are fast growing and are used as a short rotation crop, nutrients are taken with the products 
within a short period of time. As the Eucalyptus coppice after clear felling, more nutrients 
are required to support the fast growth. 

Research in Kenya has indicated that areas under Eucalyptus have high level of 
micronutrients when compared to those under old tea crops (Oballa and Langat, 2002). 
Long-term plantations of Eucalyptus have been reported to improve the soil fertility. This 



17

has been shown to take place within a period as short as 8 to 10 years (Couto and Betters, 
1995; Sunder, 1995; Laclau et al, 2003). Comparative studies of soils under Eucalyptus and 
adjacent grasslands have shown no significant differences if the trees take longer than 10 
years (Couto and Betters, 1995).

15.4 Allelopathy 
One of the criticisms of Eucalyptus is its allelopathic effect on other plants (Sasikumar et al., 
2001). This is to imply Eucalyptus produces foliar and root exudates that hinder the growth 
of other plants. An alternative argument has been that agricultural crops do not perform well 
for many years in land where Eucalyptus have been harvested. Florence (2004), in a review 
concluded that there is no scientific evidence that eucalypts competes directly with other 
plants through chemical exudes. The review also argues that it is appropriate to interpret 
any effects of eucalypt in terms of its capacity to compete for soil resources, i.e. nutrient and 
water in short supply. In an experiment in which soil from Eucalyptus plantation was used 
in a greenhouse to grow beans, no allelopathic effects were detected (Couto and Betters, 
1995). In a trial on various clones of tea grown on sites that had been prepared after removal 
of tea, Eucalyptus and natural forest showed that tea yield was highest on land previously 
under Eucalyptus (Onsando, 2001).

At Muguga, the practice is to manage fuelwood plantations for four rotations that take a 
total of nearly 30 years (Dyson, 1974; Kaumi, 1983). Once the final harvest is done the fields 
are used for cultivation of agricultural crops for 1 to 2 years (Figure 7). The observation from 
such farms is that the yields of maize, beans or potatoes are usually higher than in the nearby 
cultivated farmlands, a confirmation that Eucalyptus return a good amount of nutrient to 
the soil and allelopathic effect is not a hindrance to crop production once the trees are 
clear felled. Furthermore, a rehabilitation plot of mixed indigenous tree species at Muguga, 
planted in a site after 60 years of Eucalyptus growing showed no growth inhibition as a 
result of allelopathic residue effects. The seedlings survival and tree growth was good and 
by 15 years the tree canopies had closed, with leading trees at 20 m and crown stratification 
beginning to form.

Allelopathic effects have mainly been confirmed in high concentrates of extracts from 
Eucalyptus tissues (Sasikumar et al., 2001) or immature compost of Eucalyptus litter 
(Teshome, 2009). However, given ample time, the leachetes of Eucalyptus and organic 
compost lead to soil enrichment. Planting of Eucalyptus with other species (mixed species 
trials) has been shown to hasten that decomposition of the litter and enrichment of soil.  



18

Figure 7. Maize and beans planted on a site after clear felling of  Eucalyptus 
   (Photo by: P. Oballa)

15.5 Effects of Eucalyptus on biodiversity conservation
Several studies have been carried out to assess the effects of Eucalyptus plantations on 
biodiversity. At Muguga, plant diversity was assessed in two E. saligna plantations. There 
were about 7 times more plant species in the older plantation than in the younger one 
indicating that species richness increases with the age of the plantation (Figure 8). It is 
also evident that the lower the stocking, the higher the biodiversity of undergrowth plant 
species (Table 6).

Table 6. Number of indigenous plant species under plantations of Eucalyptus

Characteristic Plantation 2H Plantation 1C
Age in years 14 52
Number of rotations 1 4
Eucalyptus trees per ha 1550 920
Numb 50 370er of indigenous plant species per ha

Further studies showed that there were 26% and 68% of woody species in the younger 
and older plantations respectively. Observations in other parts of the country have also 
shown that at low stocking level or in high rainfall areas, regeneration of a wide range of 
indigenous plant species is found under plantations of eucalypts. Some valuable tree species 
that regenerate easily under eucalyptus plantations include; Prunus africana, Polyscias fulva, 
Zanthoxylum gillettii, Juniperus procera, Croton macrostachyus, Carissa spinarum (Carissa 
edulis) and Olea species, among many other lower plant species.



19

Figure 8. Regeneration of undergrowth of indigenous plants in Eucalyptus grandis 
    plantation (Photo by: P. Oballa)

Senbeta et al. (1998) carried out a study in Ethiopia to assess the status of indigenous species 
diversity in plantations of E. saligna and E. globulus. The plantations were aged between 11 
and 27 years. The results showed that while there were 3575 indigenous plant species per 
hectare in 11- year old plantation of E. saligna, the plantation at 27 years had a total of
18 650 indigenous plants.  Under the 16-year old plantation of E. globulus, there were 2300 
indigenous plants, while the 22-year-old plantation had 13 400 indigenous plants per ha. 
Studies in other countries have also given similar results. In Hawaii, it was reported that 
there were 42 indigenous species growing beneath E. saligna plantations at 26 to 32 years 
of age.

Binkley and Stape (2004) confirmed that large areas of Eucalyptus plantations have the 
potential to alter the diversity of plant and animal species but that varies based on the 
surrounding landscape, type of forest (savanna or natural forest), weather, agricultural 
status and the management regime. For example, plantation forests in Brazil as a rule must 
retain at least 20% of the land under indigenous forests to provide seed bank. The results 
further indicate that some trials with mixed species have shown increased benefits. Mixed 
stands that contain nitrogen-fixing tree species may increase stand growth depending 
on site conditions. Eucalyptus plantations with low stocking and open canopy create 
conditions favourable for regeneration of other plant species and therefore enhance 
biodiversity conservation (Figure 8). However, this is better enhanced in plantations close to 
indigenous forests where seed is easily dispersed by wind and animals into the Eucalyptus 
plantations.



20

16.0  Costs and Benefits of Growing Eucalypts
Farmers, private companies and the Government are increasingly growing eucalypts 
as investments for raising income. The cost of labour and inputs for growing Eucalyptus 
in Kenya varies with locality and season. The major costs of establishing Eucalyptus 
plantations include; site preparation (bush clearing, ploughing, harrowing, staking and 
pitting), procurement of seedlings, planting, weeding, protection, thinning and harvesting. 
The income from an on-farm Eucalyptus enterprise for poles production is from the sale of 
transmission poles, building poles and firewood.

Table 7 shows cost benefit analysis of a Eucalyptus plantation under management for 
transmission poles. Rotation age is 8 to 12 years (E. grandis/E. saligna/Eucalyptus clones), 
spacing between trees and rows at 2.75 m, mean annual rainfall more than 1000 mm and 
85 % survival. Half of trees are each sold as a transmission pole (1 pole and some firewood) 
and the other half is sold as 2 poles each and some firewood. 

No. Item/Activity Unit Quantity Unit Price Amount, 
KES 

 Inputs (costs) 
1 Seedlings Number 1300 10 13,000 
2 Fencing (Barbed wire + 

posts + nails + Labour) 
Lump sum - - 50,400 

3 Land Preparation Lump sum 
(Tractor hire) 

- - 5,000 

4 Stakes Number 1,300 5  6,500 
5 Staking out Man days 4 250 1,000 
6 Pitting Man days 4 250 1,000 
7 Transport of seedlings Car hire 1 6,000 6,000 
8 Planting Man days 4 250 1,000 
9 Complete Weeding (first 2 

years)  
Man days 40 250 10,000 

10 Routine scouting for 
eventualities 

Man days 40 250 10,000 

 Total Cost    103,900 
 Outputs (benefits) 
1 Transmission Poles No. 533 1,200 639,600 
2 Building poles  No.  1559 100 155,900 
3 Firewood Stacks 20 1,200 24,000 
 Gross income     819,500 
 Total Expenditure    103,900 
 Profit    715,600 
 

Table 7. Cost benefit analysis for 1 ha of an on-farm Eucalyptus enterprise under 
  management for transmission poles



21

Some of the factors that are considered when evaluating Eucalyptus enterprises for 
profitability include net present value (NPV), equal annual equivalent (EAE) and land 
expectation value (LEV). NPV is the present value of all benefits (revenue) less the cost. EAE 
is an annual payment that will pay off the NPV of an asset during its lifetime and LEV is the 
capitalized value of the expected annual net income.

Results of a study in coast province estimated the compounded cost (at 10 % per year) of 
a 5 year old 1 ha of Eucalyptus clones plantation with the initial stocking of 2500 trees as 
Ksh. 294 000 over a period of 8 years. The total present value of the same plantation was 
calculated as Ksh. 666 000, resulting in a net profit of Ksh. 372 000, which is equivalent 
to an annual income of Ksh. 74 400. The results of the same study showed that it is more 
profitable to grow Eucalyptus for production of fuelwood and poles than maize in high 
potential agricultural areas like Kitale and Uasin Gishu. At Kericho, it was shown that it is 
slightly more profitable to grow tea than Eucalyptus for fuelwood but not for transmission 
poles (Figure 9). The estimated volume of wood that can be produced under various site 
conditions from ages 5 to 8 years for E. grandis varies from 75 to 360 m3 ha-1.

 

0

200000

400000

600000

800000

1000000

Maize (l) Maize (m) Maize (h)
(f)

EucalyptusEucalyptus
(p)

Tea

Farming enterprise

Gr
os

s i
nc

om
e, 

KS
h

Figure 9. Net income of growing eucalyptus, maize and tea for 8 years (l = low potential, 
                    m  = medium potential, h = high potential, f = fuelwood and p = pulp wood).



22

The above findings are similar to those by Cheboiwo and Maritim (2004), where growing 
trees gave positive returns for areas that yield more than 15 m3ha-1yr-1 (VG1). It is therefore 
profitable to grow Eucalyptus in all areas suitable for agriculture. 

17.0 Value of Eucalyptus in Kenya
The total area under eucalypts in Kenya is estimated as 100,000 ha, comprising: 15,000 ha 
in state forests, about 35,000 ha on private land owned by large companies, and 50,000 ha 
owned by farmers and local authorities in the form of woodlots, ornamentals, boundary 
planting, avenue planting and scattered trees on communal land. The total estimated 
standing volume of eucalypts round wood is about 27 million m3. Thus a conservative 
potential monetary value of Eucalyptus trees in Kenya is 30 billion Kenya Shillings.

18.0 Promoting Eucalyptus in Kenya
To promote tree planting on farms, the government has provided favourable policies that 
give emphasis to farm forestry through the Economic Recovery Strategy for wealth and 
employment creation paper (2003), the Draft Forest Policy, 2005 and Forest Act, 2005. Among 
the key favourable actions include proposals to entrench forest products trade liberalization; 
tax incentives for trees grown on farms as reflected in the 2005-6 budget; leasehold and 
concessions to private sector in public forests; the creation of out-grower schemes through 
appropriate funding mechanisms and promotion of value addition in forest products. The 
policy on on-farm tree planting emphasizing that at least 10% of land holdings be put under 
tree cover is another important milestone in afforestation. More specifically to promotion of 
growing of eucalypts, the government is developing a policy on Eucalyptus and has caused 
the development of guidelines on hands-on growing of eucalypts by the Kenya Forest 
Service and a production of this technical publication detailing facts on Eucalyptus growing 
by the Kenya Forestry Research Institute. 

19.0 Conclusions and Recommendations
Based on the facts on growing Eucalyptus in Kenya as presented in this document, the 
following conclusions are made:

•	 Eucalypts	 provide	 multiple	 benefits	 ranging	 from	 industrial	 wood,	 poles,	
timber, fuelwood, bee forage, essential oils and many environmental services 
such as windbreaks, erosion control, buffer to natural forests, flood control 
and climate change mitigation. Eucalyptus is also currently widely used in 
construction, joinery and furniture.

•	 There	are	specific	Eucalyptus	species	adapted	to	various	ecological	zones	 in	
Kenya. Planting these eucalypts in the appropriate ecological sites is important 
to maximize on yields, while reducing negative environmental impacts.

•	 Farmers	 are	 expanding	areas	under	 Eucalyptus	 to	meet	 increasing	demand	
for forest products and to generate income. When planted on-farm, eucalypts 
should be restricted to sites where it will not adversely affect agricultural crops 
or neighbouring farms.



23

In implementing the above recommendations, there will be need to adhere to policy to guide 
planting of Eucalyptus to reduce negative environmental and socio-economic impacts. The 
policy is being developed within the framework of national forest policies, which are part 
of national economic and social development policies, especially those related to poverty 
alleviation, employment creation, reduction of pressures on natural forests and participatory 
natural resource management. 

•	 Fast	growth	and	high	biomass	yield	of	Eucalyptus	require	a	high	level	of	water	
consumption that must be balanced with other competing water uses such as 
agriculture and domestic needs. Planting of Eucalyptus species should therefore 
be restricted to sites recommended by the policy guidelines.

•	 When	 Eucalyptus	 is	 grown	 on	 short	 rotation,	 soil	 nutrient	 removal	 is	 high.	
Management systems should therefore include soil nutrient replenishment 
through application of fertilizers. For long rotations (12 years and above) 
nutrient recycling is similar to that of natural forest where decaying debris 
return minerals to enrich the soil.

•	 Mixing	Eucalyptus	with	other	tree	species	can	enrich	productivity	in	plantations,	
as these species hasten decomposition of litter, leading to soil enrichment. 
Biodiversity within Eucalyptus plantations is high in low-density plantations of 
over 15 years of age.

•	 There	 are	 still	 many	 issues	 on	 Eucalyptus	 relating	 to	 uses,	 physiological	
development and environmental influences that are characterized with 
uncertainty  and need further research, some of which are site specific.



24

Albreicht, J. (ed) (1993). Tree seed handbook of Kenya. Kenya Forestry Research Institute. 
Pp 264.

Ball, J.B. (1995). Development of Eucalyptus plantations: An overview. In: Proceedings of 
Regional expert consultation on Eucalyptus. Vol. 1 FAO Regional Office for Asia and 
Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.

Binkley, D. and Stape, J.L. (2004). Sustainable management of Eucalyptus plantations in a 
changing world. In: Borralho, N. et al (Ed.); Eucalyptus in a changing world. Proceedings 
of IUFRO Conference, Aveiro, 11-15 October 2004.

Boland, D. J., Brooker, M. I. H., Chippendale, G. M., Hall, N. Hyland, B. P. M. and Johnson, R. D. 
(2006). Forest trees of Australia. Melbourne, CSIRO, Australia.

Calder, I.R. (1994) Eucalyptus water and sustainability. A summary report. ODA Forestry 
Series No 6. Institute of Hydrology, Walligford, Oxon.

Calder, I.R., Paul T.W., Rosier, Prasanna, K.T. and Parameswarappa (1997). Eucalyptus water 
use greater than rainfall input – a possible explanation from southern India. Hydrology 
and Earth System Sciences 1(2): 249 – 256.

Cheboiwo, J.K. and Maritim, H.K. (2004). Comparative evaluation of farm forestry enterprises 
versus maize cultivation in western Kenya. In: Proceedings of the 2nd KEFRI Scientific 
Conference, 1- 4 November 2004. Pp265-272.

Couto, L. and Betters, D.R. (1995). Short-rotation eucalypt plantations in Brazil: social and 
environmental issues. Biofuels Feedstock Development Program. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, USA. 

Cromer, R.N., Cameron, D.M., Rance, S.J., Ryan, P.A. and Brown, M. (1993). Response to 
nutrients in Eucalyptus grandis.  Biomass accumulation. Forest Ecology and Mangement 
62(1-4): 211-230.

Davidson, J. (1995). Ecological aspects of Eucalypts. In: Proceedings of Regional expert 
consultation on Eucalyptus. Vol. 1 FAO Regional Office for Asia and Pacific, Bangkok, 
Thailand.

Dyson, W.G. (1974). Experiments on growing Eucalyptus woodfuel in the semi-deciduous 
forests zone in Kenya. E. Afr. Agric. J. 39: 349 – 335.

Eldridge, K.G., Davidson, J.,  Harwood, C. and van Wyk, G. (1994). Eucalyptus domestication 
and breeding. Clarendon Press, Oxford. Pp 288.

Evans J. (2004). Plantation forestry in the tropics. Third edition. Oxford Science  Publication. 
USA. Pp 403.

Florence, R.G. (2004). Ecology and Silviculture of Eucalyptus Forests. CSIRO Publishing, 
Australia. Pp 413. 

Food and Agriculture Organization (1979). Eucalyptus for planting. FAO Forestry Series No. 
1 FAO, Rome. Pp 677.  

Food and Agriculture Organization (1998). The Eucalyptus Dilemma. FAO of the United 
Nations. FAO, Rome.

Food and Agriculture Organization (2009). Eucalyptus in East Africa: The Socio-economic 
and Environmental issues. Report to FAO Forestry and Wildlife Programme in Africa.

References



25

Gottneid, D. and Thogo, S. (1975). The growth of Eucalyptus at Muguga Arboretum. EAAFRO 
Forestry Technical Note No. 33.

Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (2010). Frequently asked questions on 
Eucalyptus. ICFRE Webmail.

Kallrackal, J. and Somen, C.K. (1997). An eco-physiological evaluation of the suitability of 
Eucalyptus grandis for planting in the tropics. Forest Ecology and Management 95(1): 
53 – 61.

Kaumi, S.Y.S. (1983). Four rotations of Eucalyptus yield trial. Commonwealth Forestry Review 
62: 19 –24.

Kimondo, J.M. and Konuche, P.K.A. (1989). Results of Eucalyptus species trials and 
establishment methods on seasonally waterlogged soils at Turbo. KEFRI Technical 
Note No. 4.

Konuche, P. K. A. (1989). Results of Eucalyptus species trial at Londiani. KEFRI Technical Note 
No 6.

Kenya Forest Services, (2009). A guide to on-farm Eucalyptus growing in Kenya. Kenya Forest 
Services, Ministry of Forestry and Wildlife, Kenya. Pp 29.

Kenya Forest Department (1996). Technical Order No. 4.4.04: Eucalyptus.
Kirongo, B.B. and Muchiri, M.N. (2009). Modelling early growth of Eucalyptus hybrid clones 

at the Kenyan coast. Journal of East African Natural Resources Management 3: 257-271.
Laclau, J.P., Deleporte, P., Ranger, J., Bouilet, J. P. and Kazotti, G. (2003). Nutrient dynamics 

throughout the rotation of Eucalyptus clonal stands in Congo. Annals of Botany 91: 
879-892.

Liu, H. and Li, J. (2010). The study of ecological problems of Eucalyptus plantation and 
sustainable development in Maoming Xiaoliang. Journal of Sustainable Development 
3(1): 197-201.

Maua, J.O. (1997). Performance of Eucalyptus camaldulensis Dehnh. var. camaldulensis 
provenances irrigated under conditions in Bura – Tana, Kenya. KEFRI Technical Note 
No 19.

Maundu, P. and Tengnas, T. (eds) (2005). Useful trees and shrubs for Kenya. Technical 
handbook No 35, Nairobi, Kenya: World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF – ECA). Pp. 484.

Morgan, H.D. and Barton, C.V.M. (2008). Forest-scale sap flux responses to rainfall in dryland 
eucalyptus plantation. Plant and Soil 305(1-2): 1-19.

Muchiri, M.N., Wamalwa, L., Oballa, P., Mbinga, J., Chagala-Odera, E. and Oeba, V.O. (2005). 
Performance of Eucalyptus clones and species in Kenya. Tree Biotechnology Project 
Report. KEFRI, Muguga. 

Munishi, P.K.T. (2007). The Eucalyptus controversies in Tanzania. TAF Annual General 
meeting, Dodoma, Tanzania. (http://www.taftz.org/reports)

Mutitu, K. E. Mwangi, L. Otieno, B. and Minjire, M. (2008). Pests and diseases associated with 
Eucalyptus in Kenya. KEFRI Research Note No. 7.

Mwaniki, F., Muluvi, G., Gichuki, C., Oeba, V.O. and Kanyi, B. (2009). Development of non-mist 
vegetative propagation protocol for Eucalyptus Hybrid Clones. Journal of East African 
Natural Resources Management 3: 283 -295.



26

National Academy of Sciences (1980). Firewood crops. Shrub and tree species for energy 
production. Washington, D.C. Pp 236.

Oballa, P. O. (1989). Interim results of a progeny trial of Eucalyptus grandis at Turbo. KEFRI 
Technical Note No 5.

Oballa, P.O. and Giathi G. (1996). Growth performance of Eucalyptus grandis at Elburgon 
and Turbo. In: Proceedings of joint KEFRI-FD National Conference on the state of forest 
research and management in Kenya 3-5 June 1996, Muguga. P 98- 105.

Oballa, P. O. and Langat, D. K. (2002). Unpublished Environmental impact assessment report 
for establishment of plantations of eucalypts for Sinendet Cooperative Society Limited. 
KEFRI, Muguga. Unpublished report

Oeba, V.O., Muchiri, M.N. and Kariuki, J.G. (2009). Growth performance of Eucalyptus hybrid 
clones and four common landraces in Kenya. Journal of East African Natural Resources 
Management 3: 219-236.

Onsando, J. (2001). Performance of clones on Ex-Tea, Ex-Eucalyptus and Ex-Forest soils. 
Unpublished Report. Unilever, Kericho.

Otieno, B., Mutitu, K.E., Mwangi, L., Minjire, M. (2009). Insect pests and diseases associated 
with Eucalyptus hybrid clones in Kenya. Journal of East African Natural Resources 
Management 3: 252 – 256.

RELMA (2006). Rising preferences for Eucalyptus poses dilemma in eastern Africa. Regional 
Land Management Unit, ICRAF. http://www.relma.org

Robertson, D. (2005). South Africa water project clears water – guzzling alien plant infestation. 
(www.voanews.com/English/news/a-13-2005-03-22voa19).

Sasikumar, K. Vijayalakshmi, C. and Parthiban, K. T. (2001). Allelopathic effects of four 
Eucalyptus species on redgram (Cajanus cajan L.). Journal of Tropical Agriculture 39: 134 
– 138.

Scott, F. and Welch, W. (1996). Streamflow responses to afforestation with Eucalyptus grandis 
and Pinus patula and to felling in the Mokobulaan experimental catchments, South 
Africa. Journal of Hydrology 199: 350-377.

Senbeta, F. (1998). Native woody regeneration under the canopy of tree plantations at 
Munessa-Shashemene, Oromiaregion, Ethiopia. MSc thesis, Swedish University of 
Agricultural Sciences, Skinnskattberg.

Silva, W.da, Sedivama, T., Silva, A.A. da, Cardoso, A.A. (2006). Consumption and water 
efficiency use index by Eucalyptus citriodora and E. grandis plants cultivated in pots 
containing soil with three water contents in the soil jointly with different Brachiaria 
brizantha populations. Floresta (www.cababstractsplus.org/abstracts/Abstract.aspx)

Sonkoyo, L. (2009). The Eucalyptus debate. Miti. The Tree Business Magazine for Africa. No 4 
October – December 2009.

Stape, J.L. (2002). Production ecology of clonal Eucalyptus plantations in North Eastern 
Brazil. D.Phil Thesis. Colorado University, USA. Pp 237.

Stape, J.L., Goncalves, J.L.M. and Goncalves, A.N. (2001). Relationship between nursery 
practices and field performance for Eucalyptus plantations in Brazil. New Forests 22: 
19-41.



27

Sunder, S.S. (1995). The ecological, economic and social effects of Eucalyptus. The 
proceedings of Regional expert consultation on Eucalyptus. Vol. 1 FAO Regional Office 
for Asia and Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.

Teketay, D. (2003). Experience on Eucalyptus plantations in Ethiopia. Presented in the RELMA 
forum on Eucalyptus Dilemma, Nairobi, 5th June 2003.

Teshome, T. (2009). Is Eucalyptus ecologically hazardous tree species? Ethiopian e-Journal 
for Research and Innovation Foresight 1:128-134.

Tiwari, K. M. and Mathur, R. S. (1993). Water consumption and nutrient uptake by Eucalyptus. 
Indian Forester 109: 12 p 851-860.

Wamalwa, L., Chagala-Odera, E., Oeba, V. and Oballa P.O. (2007). Adaptability of four-year 
old Eucalyptus species and clones in Kenya. Discovery and Innovation Vol 19 (4): 326-
334.

White, D.A., Dunin, F.X., Turner, N.C. Ward, B.H. and Galbraith, J.H. (2002). Water use by 
contour-planted belts of trees comprised of four Eucalyptus species. Agricultural water 
management 23(1-3): 133 -152.

Whitehead, D. and Beadle, C.L. (2004). Physiological regulation of productivity and water 
use in Eucalyptus: a review. Forest Ecology and Management (www.sciencedirect.com)

Wikipedia 2009. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Eucalyptus_species



28

Annex 1: Eucalyptus Species Grown in KEFRI Arboretum, Muguga
No. Species Planting years Performance* 
1 E. grandis 1954 Fast 
2 E. saligna 1952, 1970 Fast 
3 E. globulus 1955 Fast 
4 E. regnans 1954, 1959 Fast 
5 E. camaldulensis** 1953, 1959, 1971 Moderate 
6 E. urophylla 1970, 1983  Moderate 
7 E. paniculata 1953 Moderate 
8 E. tereticornis 1956, 1959, 1971,  Moderate 
9 E. citriodora 1953 Moderate 
10 E. cloeziana 1954, 1975 Moderate 
11 E. delegatensis 1972 Moderate 
12 E. fastigata 1954 Moderate 
13 E. gigantean (delegatensis) 1957, 1970 Moderate 
14 E. maidenii 1953 Moderate 
15 E. microcorys 1954 Moderate 
16 E. nitens 1959 Moderate 
17 E. rubida 1959 Moderate 
18 E. zanzibar species(C)  1955, 1971 Moderate 
19 E. baxteri 1959 Slow 
20 E. cladocalyx (corynoxalyx) 1954 Slow 
21 E. bicostata 1957 Slow 
22 E. crebra 1954, 1959 Slow 
23 E. cypeocarpa (E. goniocalyx) 1959 Slow 
24 E. deglupta 1959 Slow 
25 E. botryoides 1953, 1959 Slow 
26 E. diversicolor 1954 Slow 
27 E.dives 1957, 1959 Slow 
28 E. drepanophylla 1954 Slow 
29 E. dunii 2003 Slow 
30 E. eugenioides  Slow 
31 E. bosistoana 1956, 1959 Slow 
32 E. ficifolia   Slow 
33 E. bicolor 1956 Slow 
34 E. globoidea 1956, 1959 Slow 
35 E. acmenioides 1954 Slow 
36 E. gomphocephala 1956 Slow 
37 E. goniocalyx  Slow 
38 E. alba 1970 Slow 
39 E. gummifera 1954 Slow 
40 E. longifolia 1959 Slow 
41 E. macarthurii 1953 Slow 
42 E. macrorhyncha 1956  Slow 
43 E. cambageana 1983 Slow 
47 E. marginata 1955 Slow 
48 E. melanophloia 1954 Slow 
50 E. melliodora 1954, 1959 Slow 
51 E. bridgesiana (E. stuartiana) 1954 Slow 
52 E. muelleriana 1954, 1959 Slow 
53 E. nova-anglica 1956 Slow 
54 E. nubilis (E. fibrosa var 

nubile) 
1955 Slow 

55 E. obliqua 1957, 1959 Slow 
56 E. ovata 1959  Slow 
57 E. pilularis 1954 Slow 
58 E. punctata 1953 Slow 
59 E. populnea 1983, 1984, 1987 Slow 
60 E. baueriana 1959 Slow 
61 E. resinifera 1953 Slow 
62 E. robusta 1954 Slow 
63 E. rostrata (E. camaldulensis)** 1959 Slow 
64 E. rummeryi 1964 Slow 
65 E. amygdalina (E. salicifolia) 1957, 1959 Slow 
66 E. salmonophloia 1954 Slow 
67 E. scabra 1959 Slow 
68 E. sideroxylon 1953, 1959 Slow 
69 E. sieberi (E. sieberana) 1959 Slow 
70 E. tesselaris 1983  Slow 
71 E. viminalis 1953, 1959 Slow 
 



29

No. Species Planting years Performance* 
1 E. grandis 1954 Fast 
2 E. saligna 1952, 1970 Fast 
3 E. globulus 1955 Fast 
4 E. regnans 1954, 1959 Fast 
5 E. camaldulensis** 1953, 1959, 1971 Moderate 
6 E. urophylla 1970, 1983  Moderate 
7 E. paniculata 1953 Moderate 
8 E. tereticornis 1956, 1959, 1971,  Moderate 
9 E. citriodora 1953 Moderate 
10 E. cloeziana 1954, 1975 Moderate 
11 E. delegatensis 1972 Moderate 
12 E. fastigata 1954 Moderate 
13 E. gigantean (delegatensis) 1957, 1970 Moderate 
14 E. maidenii 1953 Moderate 
15 E. microcorys 1954 Moderate 
16 E. nitens 1959 Moderate 
17 E. rubida 1959 Moderate 
18 E. zanzibar species(C)  1955, 1971 Moderate 
19 E. baxteri 1959 Slow 
20 E. cladocalyx (corynoxalyx) 1954 Slow 
21 E. bicostata 1957 Slow 
22 E. crebra 1954, 1959 Slow 
23 E. cypeocarpa (E. goniocalyx) 1959 Slow 
24 E. deglupta 1959 Slow 
25 E. botryoides 1953, 1959 Slow 
26 E. diversicolor 1954 Slow 
27 E.dives 1957, 1959 Slow 
28 E. drepanophylla 1954 Slow 
29 E. dunii 2003 Slow 
30 E. eugenioides  Slow 
31 E. bosistoana 1956, 1959 Slow 
32 E. ficifolia   Slow 
33 E. bicolor 1956 Slow 
34 E. globoidea 1956, 1959 Slow 
35 E. acmenioides 1954 Slow 
36 E. gomphocephala 1956 Slow 
37 E. goniocalyx  Slow 
38 E. alba 1970 Slow 
39 E. gummifera 1954 Slow 
40 E. longifolia 1959 Slow 
41 E. macarthurii 1953 Slow 
42 E. macrorhyncha 1956  Slow 
43 E. cambageana 1983 Slow 
47 E. marginata 1955 Slow 
48 E. melanophloia 1954 Slow 
50 E. melliodora 1954, 1959 Slow 
51 E. bridgesiana (E. stuartiana) 1954 Slow 
52 E. muelleriana 1954, 1959 Slow 
53 E. nova-anglica 1956 Slow 
54 E. nubilis (E. fibrosa var 

nubile) 
1955 Slow 

55 E. obliqua 1957, 1959 Slow 
56 E. ovata 1959  Slow 
57 E. pilularis 1954 Slow 
58 E. punctata 1953 Slow 
59 E. populnea 1983, 1984, 1987 Slow 
60 E. baueriana 1959 Slow 
61 E. resinifera 1953 Slow 
62 E. robusta 1954 Slow 
63 E. rostrata (E. camaldulensis)** 1959 Slow 
64 E. rummeryi 1964 Slow 
65 E. amygdalina (E. salicifolia) 1957, 1959 Slow 
66 E. salmonophloia 1954 Slow 
67 E. scabra 1959 Slow 
68 E. sideroxylon 1953, 1959 Slow 
69 E. sieberi (E. sieberana) 1959 Slow 
70 E. tesselaris 1983  Slow 
71 E. viminalis 1953, 1959 Slow 
 

NOTE:
1.    * Fast             - mean annual height increment >2m for the first 8 years
    Moderate - mean annual height increment of 1-2 m for the first 8 years

    Slow           - mean annual height increment <1 m for the first 8 years

 

2.    **species 5 and 63 are the same but vary in origin

3.     Apart from Eucalyptus species found in Muguga arboretum,  various individuals and organizations 
        have introduced other species.

No. Species Planting years Performance* 
1 E. grandis 1954 Fast 
2 E. saligna 1952, 1970 Fast 
3 E. globulus 1955 Fast 
4 E. regnans 1954, 1959 Fast 
5 E. camaldulensis** 1953, 1959, 1971 Moderate 
6 E. urophylla 1970, 1983  Moderate 
7 E. paniculata 1953 Moderate 
8 E. tereticornis 1956, 1959, 1971,  Moderate 
9 E. citriodora 1953 Moderate 
10 E. cloeziana 1954, 1975 Moderate 
11 E. delegatensis 1972 Moderate 
12 E. fastigata 1954 Moderate 
13 E. gigantean (delegatensis) 1957, 1970 Moderate 
14 E. maidenii 1953 Moderate 
15 E. microcorys 1954 Moderate 
16 E. nitens 1959 Moderate 
17 E. rubida 1959 Moderate 
18 E. zanzibar species(C)  1955, 1971 Moderate 
19 E. baxteri 1959 Slow 
20 E. cladocalyx (corynoxalyx) 1954 Slow 
21 E. bicostata 1957 Slow 
22 E. crebra 1954, 1959 Slow 
23 E. cypeocarpa (E. goniocalyx) 1959 Slow 
24 E. deglupta 1959 Slow 
25 E. botryoides 1953, 1959 Slow 
26 E. diversicolor 1954 Slow 
27 E.dives 1957, 1959 Slow 
28 E. drepanophylla 1954 Slow 
29 E. dunii 2003 Slow 
30 E. eugenioides  Slow 
31 E. bosistoana 1956, 1959 Slow 
32 E. ficifolia   Slow 
33 E. bicolor 1956 Slow 
34 E. globoidea 1956, 1959 Slow 
35 E. acmenioides 1954 Slow 
36 E. gomphocephala 1956 Slow 
37 E. goniocalyx  Slow 
38 E. alba 1970 Slow 
39 E. gummifera 1954 Slow 
40 E. longifolia 1959 Slow 
41 E. macarthurii 1953 Slow 
42 E. macrorhyncha 1956  Slow 
43 E. cambageana 1983 Slow 
47 E. marginata 1955 Slow 
48 E. melanophloia 1954 Slow 
50 E. melliodora 1954, 1959 Slow 
51 E. bridgesiana (E. stuartiana) 1954 Slow 
52 E. muelleriana 1954, 1959 Slow 
53 E. nova-anglica 1956 Slow 
54 E. nubilis (E. fibrosa var 

nubile) 
1955 Slow 

55 E. obliqua 1957, 1959 Slow 
56 E. ovata 1959  Slow 
57 E. pilularis 1954 Slow 
58 E. punctata 1953 Slow 
59 E. populnea 1983, 1984, 1987 Slow 
60 E. baueriana 1959 Slow 
61 E. resinifera 1953 Slow 
62 E. robusta 1954 Slow 
63 E. rostrata (E. camaldulensis)** 1959 Slow 
64 E. rummeryi 1964 Slow 
65 E. amygdalina (E. salicifolia) 1957, 1959 Slow 
66 E. salmonophloia 1954 Slow 
67 E. scabra 1959 Slow 
68 E. sideroxylon 1953, 1959 Slow 
69 E. sieberi (E. sieberana) 1959 Slow 
70 E. tesselaris 1983  Slow 
71 E. viminalis 1953, 1959 Slow 
 



30


