
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

A typical hallow well

Context
Groundwater  constitutes  a  potential
source  of  safe  water  in  both  rural  and
urban  settings  in  Kenya.  Both  national
and  county  governments  are  striving  to
realize  the  United  Nations'  Sustainable
Development  Goal  6:  Access  to  safe
water  for  all  by  the  year  2030.  Further,
Section 43 of  the Constitution of  Kenya
on  economic  and  social  rights,
guarantees  access  to  safe  water  and
adequate  quantities.  The  sub-surface  is
also  used in  most  parts  of  Kenya as  a
repository  of  human  waste  through  pit
latrines and as a source of groundwater
from shallow wells. Pit latrines are hand-
dug with the depths of less than 30m. In
localities with shallow groundwater tables,
these pit latrines can intercept the water
table. 

Like  the  pit  latrines,  shallow  wells  are
often  hand-dug  and  commonly  located
close to or within household compounds.
Wells provide a vital source of safe water
to millions of people, in rural  and urban
Kenya, who are either not connected to a
piped  water  supply  or  are  where  piped
supplies are intermittent. Conjunctive use
of the shallow sub-surface as a repository
of  human waste and a  source of  water
poses a threat to groundwater quality. 

Often  these  water  points  and  sanitation
facilities are located close to each other. 

This research under the AfriWatSan project
assessed  groundwater  and  sanitation
challenges  based  on  field  surveys,
sampling, analyses, and interviews as well
as  reviews  of  the  literature  and  historical
borehole data in Kisumu, Kenya. Previous
studies  in  the  area  have  shown  that  the
number  of  shallow  wells,  buildings,
unimproved  pit  latrines  and  sanitary  risks
have  increased  tremendously  between
1999 and 2019.  This study confirmed that
the main water and sanitation challenges in
Kisumu  are:  (1)  inadequate,  poor  and
deteriorating  water  quality,  (2)  poor  waste
disposal  management  systems,  and  (3)
poor sanitation services. There is a need for
the  introduction  of  new  and  sustainable
groundwater  approaches  supported  by
science  and  decision-making  processes
that  involve  all  stakeholders.  Current
deficiencies  in  the  provision  of  adequate
water and dignified sanitation to the poor in
Kisumu can be remedied through improved
knowledge  on  shallow  aquifer  dynamics
and innovative research. It was noted that
apart  from the  donor  agencies  and multi-
national  NGOs,  private  investors  are
unwilling  to  invest  in  water  projects  in
Kisumu  due,  in  part,  to  government
legislation that constrains the cost that may
be levied on water.

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Sanitation challenges, groundwater 
perspectives and their intertwined 
relationships in Kisumu, Kenya
 Japhet R. Kanoti, Prof. Daniel O. Olago, Prof. Nobert O. Akech, Prof. Christopher M. Nyamoi, 
Dr Simeon Dulo, Dr Richard Ayah, Prof. Richard Taylor

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

15

 Groundwater is the preferred 
alternative water source 
during times of shortages 
and in areas not served 
by piped water supplies.

Pit latrines are the main 
sanitation facilities in 
Kisumu where sewerage 
extends over less than 20
per cent of the city.

Pit latrines contribute to 
microbial contamination 
of shallow groundwater in
Kisumu.

The sub-surface can be used 
both as a source of water 
and as a repository of 
human waste.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Approach and Results
Kisumu County is one of the 47 counties in
Kenya. It is located between longitudes 33°
20’E  and  35°  20’E  and  latitudes  0°
20’South  and  0°  50’South  (County
Government  of  Kisumu,  2018).  Total  land
area is 2086 km2 with ~567 km2 covered
by water. Kisumu is situated on the shores
of  Lake  Victoria,  the  second-largest
freshwater  lake in the world.  Due to poor
investment  in  the  water  sector,  only  a
fraction of the city's water demand is met
through  the  piped  supply  from  treated
surface  water.  The  main  water  treatment
works are situated in Dunga, on the shore
of Lake Victoria. Massive pumps are used
to  lift  water  from  Lake  Victoria  to  the
treatment  plant.  The  second  source  of
water  is  the  Kajulu  gravity  water  intake
along River  Kajulu.  Alternative sources  of
water include shallow wells and boreholes
constructed  by  communities  and  donor
agencies. However, these alternatives have
their  challenges ranging from vulnerability
to  contamination,  over-abstraction  and
depletion.  

Water  coverage in Kisumu is about 75 er
cent  (KIWASCO,  2017).  The  supply  is,
however,  intermittent  due  to  old  and
dilapidated  water  infrastructure,  power
outages,  and  the  climate  associated  with
high  and  low  discharges  of  the  River
Kajulu.  The  shallow  aquifer  underlying
Kisumu  supplies  water  to  large  areas
during  supply  shortages  from  the  Dunga
and Kajulu intakes. Secondly, 82 per cent
of households in Kisumu are not connected
to  the  sewerage  system  and  rely  on  pit
latrines  and /or  septic  systems for  faecal
waste disposal (KIWASCO, 2017). Limited
access  to  safely  managed  water  and
sanitation  infrastructure  and  services
compromises public health. Understanding
the risks posed by these two practices is
essential  for  expanding  access  to  safe
water and sanitation practice in low-income
settings.

The AfriWatSan project, financed by the UK
government (DFID) and The Royal Society
(UK), sampled water from existing 22 sites
in  Otonglo,  Obunga,  Manyatta  A  and
Manyatta  B settlements  and newly  drilled
six  monitoring  boreholes  distributed
randomly  in  these  informal  settlements.
The results confirm the presence of faecal
bacteria in  groundwater  at  varying levels.
Springs  and shallow wells  within  Obunga
and  Manyatta  were  heavily  contaminated
with colonies exceeding 1000 in 100ml of
water  (Kanoti  et.  al,  2018).  All  sources of
water were contaminated by faecal bacteria
and thus, according to WHO, unsuitable for
drinking  (Figure  1).  Such  faecal
microbiological  contamination  can  lead  to
outbreaks  of  waterborne  diseases  that
pose a risk to human health, especially for
vulnerable members of the community that
include children, elderly and sick people. 

Pumping  tests  conducted  on  six  newly
drilled research boreholes further revealed

that  Kisumu  shallow  aquifer  is  not  one
extensive unit, but rather an aggregation
of  more  localized  aquifer  units.
Groundwater yields vary from less than 1
m3/hour near RIAT in the lowlands where
the  geology  is  dominated  by  volcanic
rocks to 4 m3/hour in Manyatta B where
the geology consists of sedimentary rocks
(Kanoti et. al, 2018). Such heterogeneity
in  hydrogeological  properties  poses  a
distinct  challenge  when  promoting  the
use of shallow groundwater to meet UN
SDG  6  and  Kenya's  Constitutional
obligation on human rights. It also poses
a  significant  challenge  for  governance,
requiring  coherent  management  of  the
groundwater  resource at  the local  scale
and  the  engagement  of  local
communities.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Provision of affordable and safe water

is an international and national priority.
Low-income  consumers  are
dependent  on  shallow  groundwater
and other  unsafe  waters.  Efforts  are
needed to provide safe water to all.

 Simple  water  treatment  should  be
encouraged.  Such  measures  include
boiling  water  from  wells  and  springs
and  storing  it  in  safe  containers  for
drinking

 Pit  latrines  are  currently  constructed
without  any  regard  to  proximity  to
water  points.  Public  health  official  in
consultation  with  other  professionals
should advise on the suitable location
of pit latrines

 Poorly constructed pit latrines present
health  risks,  especially  for  children
and vulnerable  persons,  due to  their
lack of cleanliness and safety at night. 

Medium-Term
 There is a need for the introduction of

a  new  water  development  approach
that  involves  all  stakeholders.  The
perception that water is a human right
and  free  makes  investors  perceive
that  the government  may interfere in
the  water  business.  This  should  be
discussed.

 Kisumu suffers water shortages due to
many causes that include inadequate
and  poor  surface  water  quality,  low
investment  in  the  water  sector,  high
non-water  revenue,  poor  waste
disposal  management  and  poor
sanitation  services.  These  short-
comings should be addressed.

 Steps  should  be  taken  to  arrest  the
environmental  degradation  that  is
evident  in  Kisumu  and  surrounding
areas  where  deforestation  and
settlement  on  high  gradient  areas
increase  runoff,  which  has  negative
implications  on  recharge  and  flash
floods.

Acknowledgements
This brief is an output from the AfriWatSan project
funded  by  The  Royal  Society  Africa  Capacity
Building  Initiative  and  the  UK  Department  for
International  Development  (DFID)  (Grant  Ref.
AQ140023). The views expressed and information
contained  in  it  are  not  necessarily  those  of  or
endorsed by the Royal Society or DFID.

References
County  Government  of  Kisumu.  (2018).

Kisumu County  Integrated Development  Plan II,
2018-2022.

Kanoti,  et al,  (2019). Microbial and Physical
Chemical  Indicators  of  Groundwater
Contamination in Kenya: A Case Study of Kisumu
Aquifer  System,  Kenya.  Journal  of  Water
Resource and Protection, 2019, 11, 404-418

KIWASCO, (2017). Annual report
WHO/Unicef  (JMP).  (2017).  Progress  on

Drinking Water,  Sanitation and Hygiene.  Online.
Retrieved  from  https://www.who.int/water_
sanitation_health /.../jmp-2017/en/

World  Health  Organisation.  (2017).
Guidelines  for  drinking-water  quality:  Fourth
edition  incorporating  the  first  addendum.  WHO
Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data.

Figure 1: Contamination of water sources in
the  informal  settlements  in  Kisumu.  The
bacteria  values  are  reported  as  colony
forming units (CFU) in 100 ml of water

Authors
Japhet R. Kanoti (jrkanoti@uonbi.ac.ke)
Prof. Daniel O. Olago (dolago@uonbi.ac.ke
Prof. Norbert O. Akech
(opiyo-akech@uonbi.ac.ke 
Prof. Christopher M. Nyamaoi 
(cnyamai@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Geology
Dr Simeon Dulo(sodulo@uonbi.ac.ke) 
Department of Civil and Construction Engineering,
Dr Richard Ayah (ayah@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Public Health
University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 30197 – 00100, 
Nairobi, Kenya

Prof. Richard Taylor(richard.taylor@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Geography, University College 
London, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

16

mailto:jrkanoti@uonbi.ac.ke
mailto:dolago@uonbi.ac.ke

