
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Plate 1: Beautiful yellow flower of  the pear 
cactus
(Photo: Stan Shebs, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://
commons.wikimedia.org/)

Context
The  prickly  pear  cactus  has  a  negative
impact on food security,  biodiversity and
human  well-being.   The  cactus  invades
mostly arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs),
which  form  more  than  80%  of  Kenya's
landmass. Livestock keeping is the main
socio-economic  activity  in  these  areas.
The plant is hardly appreciated due to the
presence  of  spines  and  glochids  (small
spines  on  fruits)  that  cause  injuries  to
people  and  livestock.  In  Narok  County,
the cactus invasion has increased rapidly
over the last five years and has displaced
people and pasture (Githae,  2018).  The
plant has been present in Laikipia County
for more than 10 years and has invaded
grazing land, contributing to the death of
livestock  and wildlife  (Shackelton  et  al.,
2017).

Several conservancies and national parks
have also been invaded by the plant. The
plant is not only a serious threat to a wide
range of wildlife but also to plant diversity.
For  example,  in  the  Serengeti-Mara
ecosystem, prickly pear cactus is among
the  intentionally  introduced  plants  that
have  displaced  grass  and  other  fodder
plants  (Witt  et  al.,  2017).  It  has  also
occupied more than 500 km2 in the Tsavo
East  National  Park  and  its  surrounding
areas  (CABI,  2018).  In  Naibunga
conservancy,  the  plant  has  occupied
about 17,000 acres of land and invades
at  least  2 km of  habitat  per  year  (Daily

Nation,  2017).  The  potential  costs
associated  with  the  invasion  of  natural
pasture are based on reduced grazing land,
replacement  of  natural  pasture,  negative
impacts  on  livestock  health,  and  reduced
mobility of livestock. Although the full  cost
of the impacts of cactus invasion in Kenya
has  not  yet  been  quantified,  rural
households  lose  between  50  and  100
thousand shillings a year because of cactus
(Shackleton,  2017).   With  the  current
changes in climate, the plant is likely to be
a  growing  problem  to  rural  livelihoods  if
appropriate measures to control its spread
are not put into place. 

Prickly  pear  cactus  is  among  the  most
common  introduced  invasive  plant  in
Kenya. Originally from America, the plant is
widespread in the arid and semi-arid areas.
Prickly pear is a spiny shrub with different
shapes, which has attractive yellow flowers
and purple-reddish fruits (Figure 2 and 3). 

The  cactus  has  invaded  Asia,  Africa  and
Europe.  In Africa,  it  has been reported in
several  countries,  including  Eritrea,
Ethiopia,  Namibia,  Morocco,  South  Africa
and  Kenya.  The  counties  most  widely
invaded  in  Kenya  are  Samburu,  Narok,
Laikipia, Baringo, Nakuru, Kajiado and Taita
Taveta with small patches occurring in the
neighbouring  counties.  Cactus  pear  was
first  introduced  in  Laikipia  in  the  early
1950s as an ornamental plant. Today, it has
spread far and wide mainly through human
use,  for  example as ornamental  plants  or
as live fences. However, these uses cannot

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Cactus invasion: A Threat to 
Biodiversity and Food Security
 Dr Eunice W. Githae

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

9

Invasive cactus degrades 
rangelands and reduces 
availability and accessibility 
of pasture and other natural 
resources.

Cactus invasion reduces 
biodiversity hence affecting 
ecosystem goods and services 
that are essential for human 
well-being.

There is limited information and
lack of public awareness on 
the harmful impacts caused 
by invasive cactus.

Rural households lose between 
50 and 100 thousand 
shillings a year because of 
cactus



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

compensate  for  the  overall  negative
impacts exposed by the invasion.

Their  seeds  are  dispersed  by  baboons,
birds  and  elephants.  Broken  pieces  are
scattered  by  animals  as  they  move  from
one place to another. The plant can survive
well  during  prolonged  drought  and  the
seeds can stay in  the soil  for  almost  two
years as they wait to sprout during the rainy
season.  These  characteristics  enable  the
plant to be more aggressive than others.

Controlling and Preventing 
Further Spread 
The  most  applied  methods  of  controlling
cactus  are  manual  such  as  chopping,
burying  and  burning.  These  are  difficult,
involve a lot of labour, and cannot provide a
lasting  solution.  Chemicals,  on  the  other
hand, are used after chopping but the plant
regenerates after some time. The control of
prickly pear cactus in other countries such
as South Africa is entirely reliant on a bio-
control insect, which was also introduced in
a  pilot  project  in  Laikipia  and  showed  a
positive result.  However,  local  pastoralists
reported that the insect was released in a
few  areas  and  the  plant  was  spreading
faster  in  the  neighbouring  areas  where  it
had not  invaded before,  especially  in  the
mountains and valleys (Daily Nation, 2017).
Complete  removal  of  cactus  plants  may
also leave the ground bare that could lead
to  further  environmental  degradation.
Successful  management  of  the  plant,
therefore,  requires  an  integrated
management plan of the infested areas.

Several national strategies have a focus on
biodiversity conservation through control of
invasive  alien  species.  These  include  the
National Wildlife Strategy 2030, the Kenya
Vision 2030, and the National Strategy and
Action Plan for the Management of Invasive
Species  in  Protected  Areas  in  Kenya.
Based  on  these,  this  brief  recommends
several approaches to manage and reduce
the negative impacts of cactus invasion that
can  be  applied  by  the  Ministry  of
Environment, Water and Natural Resource,
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Livestock  and

Fisheries, Ministry of Tourism, and county
governments  that  are  affected  by  the
invasion.  These could lead to functional
and resilient ecosystems that can support
livestock production and wildlife; restored
and conserved biodiversity; and high level
of  awareness  and  understanding  of  the
harmful  effects,  possible  solutions  and
best practices.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Map  and  list  threatened  areas  and

species  to  improve  biodiversity  con-
servation.

 Identify possible areas of future inva-
sion  based  on  human  activities  and
climate.

 Increase awareness and understand-
ing  of  the  harmful  effects  of  cactus
invasions and their possible solutions
and  best  practices.  This  can  be
through  the  development  of  educa-
tional materials and undertaking public
outreach.



Medium-Term
 Rehabilitate  open  areas  with  indi-

genous trees.
 Develop and implement policy guide-

lines to prevent further invasion.
 Rehabilitate  and  restore  rangeland

eco-systems  through  integrated
management plans.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of  this policy  brief  was supported
by  the  AgriFose2030  program,  International
Livestock  Research  Institute  (ILRI)  and  the
Regional  Strategic  Analysis  and  Knowledge
Support  System  (ReSAKSS)  with  financial
support  from  the  Swedish  International
Development  Agency  (SIDA).  I  wish  to  thank
Stephen  Wambugu  for  his  valuable  technical
input and Anne Nyamu for the excellent editorial
support.

References
CABI  invasives  factsheet  (2018).

https://www.cabi.org/Uploads/CABI/news/Cactus-
Factsheet.pdf

Dairy  Nation  July  11  (2017).  Killer  cactus.
https://www.nation.co.ke/lifestyle/dn2/Killer-
cactus/957860-4010324-n7hx7hz/index.html

Githae,  E.  W.  (2018).  Status  of  Opuntia
invasions  in  the  arid  and  semi-arid  lands  of
Kenya. CAB Reviews, 13(3), 1-7.

Shackleton, R. T., Witt, A. B., Piroris, F. M., &
van Wilgen, B. W. (2017). Distribution and socio-
ecological  impacts  of  the  invasive  alien  cactus
Opuntia  stricta  in  eastern  Africa. Biological
Invasions, 19(8), 2427-2441.

Witt,  A.  B.,  Kiambi,  S.,  Beale,  T.,  &  Van
Wilgen, B. W. (2017). A preliminary assessment
of the extent and potential impacts of alien plant
invasions in the Serengeti-Mara ecosystem, East
Africa. Koedoe, 59(1), 1-16...

Author
Dr  Eunice W. Githae
(amon.karanja@egerton.ac.ke)
Department  of  Geography,  Egerton  University,
Box 536, Egerton, Kenya

Cactus purplish-red fruits.
(Photo: Julian Colton CC BY-SA 4.0, 
https://commons.wikimedia.org)

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

10


