
New wine in new wineskins: Research Data 
Management (RDM) by Academic Libraries as 
innovative value added service in higher 
education communities

Adefunke Olanike Alabi
University of Lagos, Nigeria

1

A Paper Presented at Ubuntu Net-Connect 
2023 Conference
Speke Resort Munyonyo in Kampala, Uganda

27th October 2023



Outline
• Context

• Case Scenario 

• Research Data management and why is it important

• Benefits of RDM

• Research Focus

• Findings

• Key Takeaways

• Conclusion & Recommendation



Traditional 
services Value added 

services

Context 
• Libraries, prior now, have been involved 

in acquisitions, cataloguing and 
classification of print and e-resources 

• Wang (2013) notes that these are “the 
traditional value chain of libraries” and 
can no longer effectively serve the 
library’s core values.



Case scenario Fostering creative and Innovative in Education Communities

1. Colorado state University Library seeks for a Research Data Librarian who will 
explore, design and implement data services, programming, support data management planning, data use/reuse,  
promote data literacy, ethical data sharing, workflows, reproducibility, and the utilization of computational tools and 
methods; promote awareness of resources and services among faculty and students through comprehensive, 
customized instructional activities on all these. Qualification: Master’s degree in library science from an ALA-
accredited program or international equivalent;  a PhD in a data-intensive field; or a master's degree in a 
data-intensive field plus two years of relevant experience in the development, coordination in RDM.

2. Georgia State University Library seeks for a Data Services Specialist who is  intellectually curious 

and innovative. This position is to propel Research Data Services (RDS) in the institution. The RDS 

Department’s array of support services directly bolsters the University’s strategic areas of 

Innovating Research, Scholarship & Creative Activity. Requirements: Expertise in supporting data 

analysis tools & methods, data visualization, finding data & statistics, data collection, and data cleaning & 

management across academic discipline



• Research support services 
comprises all these 
phases (Si et al., 2019).

• The main goal of RDM services 
is to ensure that maximum 
value is gained from the data 
collected in an investigation or 
research project. 

Research support services in Academic Communities



RDM: encompasses activities related to the 
storage, organisation, documentation, and 
dissemination of data in order to maximize 
the value of scientific investment (Borghi, 
Abrams, Lowenberg, Simms and Chodacki, 
2018).

Why is RDM important?: makes data 
findable, accessible, interoperable, 
and reusable (FAIR) and also drive 
transparency. These principles  should 
be the foundation for education and 
research communities to implement 
RDMS (OECD, 2007)

Research Data Management & Why is it important? 



Why are education communities involved in RDM as 
strategic priority?

• Requirement by Funders: Researchers (students or faculty) 
in various academic institutions are now mandated to 
comply with data management and sharing requirements 
of funding agencies  before approval of their proposal and 
as part of open data initiative

• critical to the advancement of science and scholarship, 
supports innovative solutions to economic and social 
challenges (Tri-Agencies, 2016)



2021-2023

Leading the Change
Libraries in the USA, UK, Australia and Canada have made great achievements in RDM. 
One of the reasons for this is that academic libraries in these countries have taken giant 
strides and become the driving force of RDM by ensuring that their infrastructure, tools 
and services enables researchers within their community to maximize the value of their 
research data (Si, Zeng, Guo and Zhuang, 2019)



Issues surrounding RDM
 RDM is one of the approaches needed in meeting the changing information 

needs of users in academic libraries, research and higher education 
communities (Dorcas, Jiyane, Ibinaiye and  Tijani, 2023)

 Countries and institutions, especially in Africa are at different levels  of RDM 
services. Many of these institutions do not have RDM policies, institutional 
infrastructure for RDM are still evolving (Chiware, and Becker, 2018).

 Africa as a regions have a shortage of data librarians/librarians with RDM 
skills and very few institutions are producing data scientists viz a viz data 
librarians (Frederick, 2019).

 budget for implementation of RDM services is a major obstacle for libraries 
(Hamad, Al-Fadel and Al-Soub,2021). 

 librarians should take a leadership role in RDM and drive the initiative in 
their institutions (Zotoo et al.,2022)

 RDM  is a necessity for national development, and the onus is on academic 
libraries to spearhead research data management in their various institutions 
(Zotoo and  Liu, 2019).



Research Direction
 Research Objectives

1. find out the involvement of selected 
institutions and their libraries in RDM 
(Librarians, Researchers)

2. determine the available RDM tools and 
technologies (Librarians)

3. ascertain the initiatives taken by academic 
libraries in RDM (Librarians)

4. ascertain if participants have ever taken 
any training on Research data management 
(Librarians, researchers)

5. examine the RDM skills possessed and 
training needs of academic librarians

6. Perception of researchers on provision of 
RDM by Academic Libraries as a Value-Added 
Service (researchers)

Statement of Problem

Regrettably, despite the relevance 
of RDM in education communities, 
the implementation of RDM in 
academic libraries in Nigeria is not 
well articulated in literature. 

Moreover, many academic libraries 
in Nigeria and the rest of Africa are 
still grappling with Institutional 
infrastructural support for data 
management, and the professional 
competence necessary for provision 
of RDM services



How Participants Were Selected

Participants were selected from universities who ranked 
between 1st to fourth position in Nigeria based on Times 
Higher Education World University Ranking for 2023. 
(UI, UNILAG, CU AND BUK)

Study Population: All Academic Librarians in these four 
universities  AND Researchers from three Faculties  
(Science, Social Sciences and Environmental Sciences)



Research Findings

Snippets



Findings: Involvement of Academic Libraries in RDM

Librarians Researchers



Findings: Available RDM Tools/Technologies

ResearchersLibrarians



Findings: RDM initiatives in Participating 
Academic Libraries



Findings: Training on RDM

Librarians Researchers



Findings: RDM Skills Possessed & training needs of 
Academic Librarians

Librarians



Findings: Perception of Researchers on RDM as a Value 
added service in Academic Libraries



Key Takeaway

Many institutions in the USA, 
UK, Australia and Canada have 
made, and are making  giant 
strides in  RDM. 

BECAUSE their libraries have 
accepted the responsibility for  
RDM

THEIR LIBRARIES HAVE 
REFOCUSED THEIR 
infrastructure, tools and 
services TO ENABLE 
researchers within their 
community to maximize the 
value of their research data

being more proactive 
in MEETING the RDM 
mandate in our 
communities SHOULD 
BE OUR PRIORITY

collaboration at

National and 
Regional levels 
could be our 
starting point

THEREFORE



Recommendation on RDM

Institutional Policy 
development and 

implementation  on 
RDM

Advocacy for 
RDM and training 
for Librarians on 

RDM

Academic Libraries in Nigeria 
and Africa at large should have  

Research Data Support 
Services Department and 

employ RDM Librarian



Adefunke Olanike Alabi

University of  Lagos, Akoka, Lagos

aalabi@unilag.edu.ng

Reach out to me

Q&A

mailto:aalabi@unilag.edu.ng

