
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Source: Safaricom Website

Context
In  Kenya,  Micro  and  Small  Enterprises
(MSEs)  are  key  engines  for  growth,
creation  of  employment,  innovation,
industrial development and GDP growth.
The  2016  Kenya  National  Bureau  of
Statistics  data  indicates  that  this  sector
accounted  for  45  per  cent  of  the
establishments  and  85  per  cent  of
employment (KNBS, 2016). Despite their
great  importance,  the  sector  has
experienced many challenges and one of
them  being  the  exclusion,  in  terms  of
access  and  use,  of  formal  financial
products. 
Financial  capability,  the  theory  in  which
this study is anchored, proposes that an
MSE must have the opportunity to access
suitable quality financial products (Storchi
and  Johnson,  2106).   However,  it
emphasizes that the performance of the
MSEs and in turn  the  well-being of  the
entrepreneur  hinges  on  the  financial
capabilities of the entrepreneur to embed
the  use  of  financial  products.  We
examine  two  aspects  of  financial
capabilities in this study: financial literacy
and financial behaviour.   
While the literature has focussed on the
importance  of  access,  and  Kenya  has
made great strides in term of increase in
access (Upadhyaya, 2020),  research on
financial  capabilities  of  entrepreneurs  is
still scarce (Storchi and Johnson, 2016).

Furthermore, there has been overwhelming
attention in the literature to credit products
with  literature  ignoring  payment  products
available to MSEs.  This study focuses on
one such product,  Lipa na MPesa that was
designed  to  reduce  the  over-reliance  by
MSEs  on  cash  for  making  and  receiving
payments.  Use  of  cash  has  several
challenges  including  loss  due  to  theft,
difficulty  in  tracking,  and  impulse  buying.
Therefore, this study focused on the role of
capabilities in determining the impact of the
use  of  Lipa  na  MPesa on  MSE
performance.

Operationalizing Financial 
Capabilities
This study’s key strength was developing a
detailed  operationalization  of  the  key
variable  –  financial  capabilities,  ensuring
that  several  attributes  of  financial
capabilities  were  taken  into  account.
Financial  capabilities  were  operationalized
at three levels: 
1. Financial Literacy –
(a)  Financial  knowledge  (know  about  it)
including  education,  planning,  risk
identification,  contracts,  and  cash  flow
management; 
(b)  Financial  skills  (how  to  experience)
including business plan, budgets, standards
adherence, credit management, coping with
emergencies.

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Financial Services

Role of Financial Capabilities in 
Harnessing Digital Mobile Payments 
for Enterprise Success
 Grace  N. Muraya and Dr Radha Upadhyaya

The important role played by the
financial capabilities of 
entrepreneurs to enhance 
translation of the benefits of 
innovative financial products 
to the success of MSEs.

Need for strong consumer 
protection regulations to 
ensure no hidden or 
exploitative charges to 
increase the quality of 
financial inclusion.

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

29



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

2. Desirable financial behaviour –
(actually  doing  it)  includes  investments,
savings  management,  tracking  income,
timeliness, comparing prices.
3. Digital payments –
(level of use) including receipts, payments,
savings, bank loans, and digital loans.

Further,  MSEs  success  was  operationa-
lized  as  sales  volumes,  profits,  employ-
ment, livelihoods, self-assessment.

Approach and Results
This  study  adopted  a  mixed  methods
research design to determine the impact of
financial  capabilities.  The  choice  of  the
study area, Starehe Constituency in Nairobi
County, was guided by literature which has
shown  that  urban  areas  have  higher
adoption of  formal  financial  products.  The
study began with a mapping of MSEs that
use  Lipa  na  MPesa establishing  a
population  of  344.  A total  of  103  MSEs
were  sampled  which  was  approximately
30% of the mapped population.

The bivariate analysis found out that overall
financial  capability  measure  of  financial
behaviour  had  the  greatest  significant
correlation  to  enterprise  success.  The
measures  of  the  capability  of  financial
knowledge,  financial  skills,  and  financial
behaviour had a significant correlation with
the  level  of  use  of  the  digital  financial
service  of  Lipa  na  MPesa.  There  was  a
significant  relationship  between  financial
capabilities  and  enterprise  success  at  a
confidence level of 95%.

Qualitative  analysis  brought  out  two  key
messages. First, enterprise success means
different  things  to  different  entrepreneurs.
To  some,  it  is  an  increase  in  sales,
profitability,  while  others  cited  growth  in
terms  of  opening  of  new  branches.
However,  improvement  in  livelihoods  was
considered  the  most  important,  with
respondents giving examples of being able

to  pay  school  fees  for  their  children.
Secondly,  the  use  of  Lipa  na  MPesa
increased  the  credit  ratings  of  the
enterprises with most respondents saying
they can easily access bank loans when
they need it. However, it was noted that
the uptake of digital loans was very poor.
Most  respondents  said  that  they  only
uptake the loans for personal use but not
for use in their businesses 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 The  emerging  issues  of  consumer

protection  should  be  urgently
addressed. Some of the respondents
felt  there were hidden costs that  the
digital payments services make them
incur  without  their  knowledge.
Improvement  in  consumer  protection
will  ensure  that  MSEs  continue  to
increase their  use of  formal  financial
products  rather  than turn  to  informal
products.

 There should be a proper clarification
on all  the costs implication to all  the
parties  for  both  the  buyers  and  the
sellers so that a person can make an
informed  decision  when  using  the
product.

Medium-Term
 This study revealed that there exists a

positive relationship between financial
capability  and  enterprise  success.
Aspects  of  financial  capabilities
should,  therefore,  be  enhanced
through  awareness  creation  and
capacity building.

 The key variable, financial behaviour,
is difficult to influence through training
only.  A  more  in-depth  case  study
analysis  is  therefore  needed  to
understand why  some MSEs display
positive  financial  behaviour.   The

outcome  from  the  study  may  lead  to
policies  that  enhance  their  financial
capability  which  is  a  road  to  financial
inclusion  and  is  theoretically  linked  to
outcomes  of  increased  performance,
productivity,  and  employment.  This  will
lead  to  the  increased  success  of  the
MSEs which play a very  critical  role in
the Kenyan economy.

Acknowledgements
Institute  for  Development  Studies  for  the
guidance  and  the  enabling  environment
they  have  for  research.  The  respondents
who created time during the survey, the key
informants;  special  thanks  to  them  Ravi
Ruparel,  Edoardo  Totolo  and  Samuel
Balongo.  Their  valued  time,  constructive
criticism and inputs  helped  significantly  in
shaping this study.

References
KNBS.  (2015).  Micro  and  Small

Enterprises Survey.
World  Bank.  (2013).  Why  Financial

Capability  is  important  and  how  surveys
can help.

Storchi,  S.  and  Johnson.  S.  (2016).
Financial  Capability  for  Wellbeing :  An
alternative perspective from the Capability
Approach. Centre for Development Studies,
University  of  Bath.  Calverton Down:  Bath,
BA2 7AY, UK.

Upadhyaya,  R.,  and Totolo,  E.  (2020).
The  Financial  Sector  in  Kenya. In  N.
Cheeseman,  K.  Kanyinga  &  G.  Lynch
(Eds.),  The  Oxford  Handbook  of  Kenyan
Politics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Authors
Grace N. Muraya 
(gracenmuraya@gmail.com)
Dr Radha Upadhyaya (radha@njora.com) 
Institute of Development Studies, 
University of Nairobi 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

30


