
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Figure 1: Water kiosk in Lodwar, Turkana 
County
Photo: Dennis Ong’ech

Context
Following  confirmation  of  the  first

case  of  the  novel  Coronavirus  Disease
(COVID-19) in Kenya in March 2020, the
Government  issued  an  advisory  in
ensuring  high  standards  of  hygiene
through regular handwashing using soap
and water. A national protocol on COVID-
19 was launched,  which  among others,
underscored handwashing  and  high
levels  of  hygiene  maintenance.   These
required an  increased  household  water
demand that caused elevated household
water  bills,  leaving  poor  households
vulnerable to water insecurity.  

Accessing safe water is a challenge
for pastoral communities living in arid and
semi-arid  regions  such  as  Turkana
(Balfour  et  al.,  2020).  This  situation  is
worse for internally displaced persons in
the  county.  There are  164,519
households  with  an  average  household
size of 5.6 in Turkana (KPHC, 2019:25).
Most have no access to piped water. As a
result,  the  majority  must  walk  long
distances, averaging between 5-10 kms,
in search of water. In some areas, such
as Kibish and Lomelo, the distances can
average 20 kms (KNBS, 2018).  Further,
vulnerable  and  poor  households  are
forced to fetch water from riverbeds  that
lack  potable  water  and are  often  dry,
making water  scarcity  in  the  arid  and
semi-arid regions of Kenya a potentially
devastating  socio-economic  challenge.
These  regions  may  suffer  increased
vulnerability from the pandemic. 

The  pandemic  has  severely
modified  the  patterns  and  behaviour  of
the  economy  of  water  (Vammen  and
Guillen,  2020).  Water  service  providers
(WSPs)  have  also  been  adversely
affected.  The  Lodwar  Water  and
Sanitation  Company  (LOWASCO),  for
instance, finds it hard to effectively supply
clean water  due to decreased revenues
from non-payment  (LOWASCO  official,
pers.  comm.).  With  the  government's
directive  that  WSPs should  not
disconnect  water  supply  for  3  months
(March-May  2020)  including  households
in  default,  WSPs  faced  challenges in
meeting some of  their  operational  costs
such  as  power  bills  and  staff  wages
(Senkwe  and  Gakubia,  2020).  The
directive  is  far  from  adequate,  largely
temporary,  and  unsustainable  (Senkwe
and Gakubia, 2020).

Study Approach and 
Results

This research was carried  out  through
household  interviews  in  the  water  diaries
study, key informant interviews involving a
range  of  stakeholders  involved  in  water,
health, and sanitation sectors in the county,
and  secondary  data  from  media,
government  institutions,  and  water  sector
development  partners  working in  Turkana.
It  was complemented with results from the
REACH  Kenya  Programme,  based  at  the
Institute  for  Climate  Change  and
Adaptation. The study assessed respondent
views  on  the  impact  of  the  pandemic  on
water  security  and  its burden  on  house-
holds.  It also established possible solutions
to  the  risks  faced  by  communities  in
Turkana.  The  REACH  Programme
implemented  a  household  survey  in
Turkana  Central  in  October  2017  and
established that from 909 household heads,
25% were  concerned  that  water  is  costly
and 36%  relied  on  river  water  as  a
secondary source. 

The  study  further  established  that  the
number of poor households with non-piped
water was three times more than the non-
poor  households  with  piped  water
connections.  The  majority  of  households,
therefore,  had  to  rely  on  water  kiosks,
boreholes  with  hand  pumps,  neighbours,
and the dry riverbed-scooping as their main
sources. Furthermore, the study established
that the number of  poor households using
surface  water  as  their  main  source  was
almost four  times more than the non-poor
ones. This means that such households are
exposed  to  risks  including  waterborne
diseases  and  water  access  issues.  This
situation  is  worsened  by  open  defecation
which is a major problem in the region and
poses a threat to surface water quality.  

The  water,  health,  and  sanitation
situations have further been challenged by
the  COVID-19  pandemic  which  has  likely
increased  household  water  demand  as
more frequent hand washing is advocated
for.  This  increased  demand  increases  the
vulnerability of poor households in semi-arid
urban and pastoral areas to water insecurity
and  health  challenges.  Therefore,  the
current pandemic is a critical wake-up call
to all the stakeholders in the water sector to
rethink  strategies  that  protect  vulnerable
community  members  not  only  from  the
usual  water-borne  diseases  but  also  from
other  deadly  viral  pandemics  such  as
COVID-19.  In  Turkana,  water  points  such
as  water  kiosks,  boreholes,  hand  pumps,

Series 2 – Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development – Enhancing 
development in a clean safe environment and, access to water and sanitation services.

COVID-19 Impacts on Water Burden 
among Households in Turkana
Denis Ong’ech, Prof Daniel Olago, Dr Simeon Dulo, Dr Maggie Opondo, Dr Gilbert Ouma, Prof 
Albert Mumma, Prof. Robert Hope  and Prof Katrina Charles

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

57

Effective training is a key 
determinant for adopting 
online learning in educational
institutions.

Transformational leadership 
characteristics are important 
in managing change that is 
required in learning 
institutions during the 
COVID-19 pandemic and 
beyond.

Modelling the way is a necessity 
in university management of 
online teaching and learning 
through COVID-19 Season



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

and  riverbeds  are  considered  meeting
points.  There  are  usually  small  crowds
when  people  go  to  fetch  water  or  take
animals to drink.  From observation,  many
of the water points are sometimes crowded,
social  distancing  is  not  observed,  and
people  do  not  wear  masks.  This
complacency  could  be  due  to  social
relations among the locals, being unaware
of threats and risks of COVID-19, and the
unaffordability  of  masks.  Therefore,
besides community sensitization, there is a
critical  need  for  community  water  point
management  planning  to  reduce  human
traffic,  the  interaction  between  people  at
any  given  time,  and  to  effect  social
distancing  as  required  by  government
directives to  reduce the infection  rates  at
community level. The county is well placed
to  address  this  issue  by  advancing  the
installation  of  water  Automated  Teller
Machines  (ATMs)  in  the  water  kiosks  to
minimise  the  use  of  cash  payment  and
further reduce the long queues as people
can access water any time of the day, thus
reducing human interaction. 

Many  WSPs  are  dependent  on
electricity  which  accounts  for  30-40%  of
their  total  operational  costs  (WASREB,
2020).  To  ensure  uninterrupted  water
services provision, the government gave a
directive  to  the  Kenya  Power  Lighting
Company  not  to  disconnect  WSPs
electricity which is a relief but continues to
be a burden as the debts accumulate and
will ultimately have to be paid (Senkwe et
al.,  2020).  To  address  the  issue  of
accumulated  electricity  bills  and  enhance
institutional  resilience  towards  unforeseen
financial dilemmas which can compromise
service  delivery,  WSPs need to  carry  out
energy  audits  to  reduce  electricity
consumption  and  enhance  efficiency
(Senkwe  et  al.,  2020).  Further,  through
water  audits,  they  can  generate  datasets
that can be very instrumental in achieving
leakage  reduction  and  enhancing  pump
efficiency.  Water  audits  address  this  by
comprehensively  assessing  infrastructural
components, technical operations, financial
management, and governance which helps
in  generating  a  broader  understanding of
the  existing  operations  and  maintenance
practices  and  challenges.   Alternative
renewable energy supply is also important
in  supporting  the  cost  of  water  delivery.
Lodwar  municipality  has  installed  nine
boreholes with solar pumps, which operate
effectively for 8-10 hours a day. But, there
is  still  a  need  to  install  more  water
boreholes  with  solar  systems  to  help
reduce  the  operational  costs  incurred  by
LOWASCO and the county government.  

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Through  the  county  budget  and

emergency  response  funds  supported

by  the  water  sector  trust  funds,  the
County  Government  of  Turkana
should provide budget lines for water
bowsers  to  ensure  access  to
affordable and safe water to the local
community and public institutions such
as  schools,  hospitals,  markets,  and
other  social  amenities.   This
arrangement will help in increasing the
supply and reducing the costs of water
thus  reducing  the  water  burden  and
health  risks  on  women,  households,
internally  displaced  people,  and  the
vulnerable  community  members  who
cannot afford piped water. 

 The  county  government,  through  its
water service provider, should ensure
effective  water  supply  through
continued  monitoring  and  evaluation
of  the  existing  supply  system.  This
ensures  continued  and  uninterrupted
water  supply  irrespective  of  the
changing demand. 

 Commission a floods monitoring study
and  vulnerability  assessment  of  the
water  supply systems to flash floods
that  have  been  frequent  in  Turkana
and provide recommendations on how
water  supply  systems  can  be
protected  from  the  impacts  of  such
events.  This  will  greatly  help  in
addressing  costly  infrastructural
destructions  and  water  shortages
resulting  from  flooding  events  thus
ensuring uninterrupted water supply.

Medium-Term
 Enhance  efficiency  and  institutional

financial  resilience through increased
revenue  collection  by  reducing
leakages,  addressing  non-payment
and  enhancing  pump  efficiency.
Further,  reduce the operational  costs
incurred by  LOWASCO on electricity
bills by carrying out energy audits and
installing  alternative  power  systems
such as solar power systems to help
reduce  electricity  bills.  Solar  power
systems  are  more  sustainable  and
cost-effective. By reducing operational
costs, the water services provider can
provide  water  at  a  subsidised  and
affordable fee. 

 Design a water relief project focusing
on the provision of water at affordable
rates  to  support  vulnerable  groups
(IDPs, women, poor households, and
homeless)  through  reduced  costs.
This  can  be  supplemented  by  more
sustainable  approaches  as  well  as
regular  and  up  to  date  payment  of
water bills by the national and county
government.

 Train  unsupported  community
management  groups  on  community
water point management and planning
to reduce human traffic and interaction
at  any  given  time.  This  will  greatly
help  in  addressing  the  social
distancing  protocol  of  people  being
two  metres  apart  to  reduce  the

infection  rates  at  the  community  level.
Many  water  sources  in  Turkana  are
managed  through  the  unsupported
community  management  model  where
the community organises themselves to
manage and operate the water sources
without a formal structure of governance
(financial,  technical  or  social)  that
guarantee the sustainability of the water
source. 

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  an  output  from  the
research  activities  carried  out  in  Turkana
Observatory  by the University  of  Nairobi’s
Institute for Climate Change and Adaptation
(ICCA) under  the REACH Programme led
by Oxford University and funded by the UK
Foreign  Commonwealth  Development
Office  (FCDO)  former  DFID.  The  views
expressed and information contained in it is
not  necessarily  those  of,  or  endorsed  by
FCDO.

References
Balfour, N., Obando, J., & Gohil, D. 

(2020). Dimensions of water insecurity in 
pastoralist households in Kenya. 
Waterlines, 39(1), 24-43. 

Kenya National Bureau of Statistics-
KNBS. (2018). Basic Report Based on 
2015/2016 Kenya Integrated Household 
Budget Survey (KIHBS). 

Kenya Population and Housing Census 
(KPHC). (2019). Population by County and 
Sub-County, Vol1. Kenya National Bureau 
of Statistics, Kenya.

Senkwe et al. (2020).  Water, Sanitation
and Hygiene Finance (WASH-FIN). 
Electricity Costs for Water Service 
Providers. COVID-19 UPDATE 3. USAID. 

Senkwe, B., and Gakubia, R.  (2020). 
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene Finance 
(Wash–Fin) Kenya. Rethinking the Role of 
Water Services Providers in Informal 
Settlements. COVID-19 Update 2. USAID.

Vammen, K., & Guillen, S. M. (2020). 
Water Resources of Nicaragua and COVID-
19: Between panic and apathy? Brazilian 
Journal of Biology, (AHEAD). 

Water Services Regulatory Board - 
WASREB. (2020). A performance report of 
Kenya’s water services sector 2018/ 2019. 

Authors
Dennis Ong’ech (ongetch@yahoo.co.uk) 
Prof Daniel Olago (dolago@uonbi.ac.ke)
Dr Simeon Dulo (sodulo@uonbi.ac.ke) 
Dr Maggie Opondo 
(maggie@swiftkenya.com)
Dr Gilbert Ouma (gouma@uonbi.ac.ke) 
Institute of Climate Change and Adaptation,
University of Nairobi
Prof Albert Mumma 
(amumma@amadvocates.com)
Prof Robert Hope
(robert.hope@ouce.ox.ac.uk)
Prof Katrina Charles
(katrina.charles@ouce.ox.ac.uk )
University of Oxford

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

58


