
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Lake Naivasha
(Photo: Wikimedia)

Context
The  Ramsar  Convention  is  an
international  treaty  for  the  conservation
and  sustainable  use  of  wetlands.
Wetlands are a critical component of the
natural  environment.  They  reduce  the
impact  of  flooding  by  absorbing  excess
water,  are  habitats  for  plant  and animal
species, and are a major source of water-
human activities. Wetlands are critical for
the maintenance of life on earth. Kenya’s
wetland  cover  is  approximately  14,000
km2,  which  is  3  to  4  per  cent  of  the
country’s  surface  area  (Government  of
Kenya,  2015).  To  protect  Kenya's
wetlands,  the  country  signed  the
Convention on Wetlands of  International
Importance  especially  as  Waterfowl
Habitat  (Ramsar,  1971)  on  October  5,
1990, and ratified it on June 5, 1991. By
2019,  the  country  had  designated  six
Ramsar  sites,  namely,  Lake  Nakuru
(1990),  Lake  Naivasha  (1995),  Lake
Bogoria  (2001),  Lake  Baringo  (2002),
Lake Elementaita (2005), and River Tana
(2012). The domestication of the Ramsar
Convention  in  Kenya  through  better
integration  of  the  convention  obligations
into policy frameworks would assure the
conservation  and  protection  of  the
Country’s  wetlands. The focal  agency is
the  Kenya Wildlife  Service  working  with
other  government  institutions  including
the National Environmental Management
Authority,  Ministry  of  Environment  and
Natural  Resources,  and  stakeholders
such as the World Wildlife Fund.

Approach and Results
Domestication  of  the  convention  was
evaluated  on  the  extent  to  which  its
obligations  are  integrated  into  Kenya’s
policy  frameworks,  specifically  the
Wetlands  Conservation  and  Management
Policy  (GoK,  2015),  Environment  Policy
(GoK,  2013),  Wildlife  Policy  (GoK,  2012),
National Constitution of Kenya (GoK, 2010),
and  the  Sessional  Paper  No.  6  on
Environment  and  Development  (GoK,
1999).   Selected  obligations  were:  1-
Designation of wetlands for inclusion in the
List  of  Wetlands  of  International
Importance; 2-Conservation, wise use and
management  of  wetlands  and  migratory
stocks  of  waterfowl;  3-Formulation  and
implementation  of  plans  to  promote
conservation and wise use of wetlands; 4-
Research,  monitoring  and  exchanging  of
data  and  training;  5-increasing  waterfowl
population  in  wetlands  without  altering
wetlands;  6-Consultation  and  cooperation
between countries, communities and other
stakeholders  through  education,  public
participation;  7-Representatives  to
Conference of Parties be trained experts in
wetlands/waterfowl management;  8-Parties
to  inform  International  Union  for
Conservation of Nature of every change in
the  ecological  character  of  wetlands;  9-
Regular  reporting  on  conservation,
management and wise use of wetlands and
biodiversity,  and  10-Establishing  natural
reserves on wetlands. 

The  Obligation  Integration  Susceptibility
Index  (OISI)  was  used  to  measure  the
extent of integration of the obligations into

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Domestication of the Ramsar 
Convention in Kenya
 Dr Parita Shah

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

13

Government of Kenya needs 
to do better in term of 
policies to integrate the 
Ramsar Convention.

Policies should be focused on
having more prescriptions
to meet Ramsar 
obligations. 

The Wetland Conservation 
and Management Policy 
should be the pillar of 
domestication of the 
Ramsar Convention.

Key Messages



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

the  policy  frameworks.  Scores  of  90-100
per cent are regarded as Excellent; 70-89
per cent as Very Good; 50-69 per cent as
Good; 40-49 per cent as Poor. while those
below 40  per  cent  are  regarded  as  Very
Poor.  The  OISI  results  indicated  that  the
Wetland Policy had 52 prescriptions for all
10  obligations,  thus  its  obligation
integration was 100 per cent or excellent in
the OISI scale.  For the other policies: the
Wildlife  Policy  had  17  prescriptions  for  9
obligations  (90  per  cent  integration-
excellent); Sessional Paper Number 6 had
10  prescriptions  for  7  obligations  (70  per
cent-Very  Good);  the  Environment  Policy
had 15 prescriptions for  6 obligations (60
per cent integration-Good); the Constitution
of  Kenya  had  5  prescriptions  for  3
obligations  (30  per  cent  integration-Very
Poor) (Shah, 2016).

Individual  Policy  Prescriptions  (IPP)  were
used to assess the level of integration by
checking  the  policy  prescriptions  with  the
obligations (see Figure 1). All five policies
had  prescriptions  addressing  2-
Conservation,  wise  use and management
of  wetlands  and  migratory  stocks  of
waterfowl corresponding to a 100 per cent
score. This was followed by 3-Formulation
and  implementation  of  plans  to  promote
conservation and wise use of wetlands with
a  score  of  42.8  per  cent.  The  remaining
obligations had very few prescriptions with
1-Designation of  wetlands for  inclusion  in
the  List  of  Wetlands  of  International
Importance  having  the  least  with  an  IPP
score of 0.78 per cent (Shah, 2016). 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Involve  stakeholders  in

developing/amending  policies  including
direct  communities,  academia,  water

resource  authorities  and  non-
governmental organisations.

 Develop a communication strategy for
community-based  wetland
management initiatives.

Medium-Term
 Amending existing policies  to include

all  Ramsar  obligations.  This  would
pave way for the country to have more
wetlands under protected area status.

 Have  more  policies  to  safeguard
wetlands,  for  example,  a  Biodiversity
Policy  should  be  given  priority.  The
Wetlands  Policy  on  its  own  is  not
enough.

 Policies  in  draft  form  should  be
amended  and  signed  for
domestication.  This  would  make
communities  at  the  grass-root  level
better  aware  of  conservation
strategies.

 Harmonize  different  roles  played  by
different agencies and put them under
one  institution  for  the  protection  of
Ramsar sites. 

 Develop  a  mechanism  whereby
economic  values  of  all  wetland uses
can be assessed.

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  the  outcome  of  a  larger
research  study  entitled  'Domestication  and
Application of  Biodiversity  Related Multilateral
Environmental  Agreements  (MEAs)  in  Kenya'
by  Parita  Shah  in  2016.  The  research  was
partially funded by the Deans' Committee, the
University of Nairobi in 2014 and 2015.

References
GoK.  (1999).  Sessional  Paper  No.  6  on

Environment  and  Development. Nairobi:
Government Printer. 

GoK. (2010). The National Constitution of
Kenya. Nairobi: Government Printer.

GoK.  (2012).  The  National  Wildlife
Conservation and Management Policy. Nairobi:
Government Printer. 

GoK.  (2013).  The  Environment  Policy.
Nairobi: Government Printer.

GoK.  (2015).  National  Wetlands
Conservation  and  Management  Policy. Nairobi:
Government Printer. 

Ramsar  Convention  Secretariat.  (2016).  An
overview of the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands.
Technical report. 

Shah.  P.  (2016).  Domestication  and
Application  of  Biodiversity  Related  Multilateral
Environmental  Agreements  (MEAs)  in  Kenya.
Unpublished  PhD  Thesis;  University  of  Nairobi,
Kenya.

Figure  1:  Level  of  Ramsar  Convention
obligation integration in policy prescriptions
(per  cent  of  integrated  obligations  versus
national policies). 

Author
Dr Parita S. Shah 
(suryasuru@yahoo.co.uk)
Department of Geography and Environmental 
Studies, University of Nairobi, P. O. Box 30197, 
00100, Nairobi, Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

14


