
 
  
IST-Africa 2023 Conference Proceedings 
Miriam Cunningham and Paul Cunningham (Eds) 
IST-Africa Institute and IIMC, 2023 
ISBN: 978-1-905824-71-7 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 1 of 11 

eduroam in Africa 
Silvia FIORE1, Leïla DEKKAR1, Kennedy ASEDA2 

1GÉANT, Hoekenrode 3 6th floor, Amsterdam, 1102 BR, The Netherlands 
Tel: +31(0)611782816, Email: silvia.fiore@geant.org, leila.dekkar@geant.org,  

2KENET, Jomo Kenyatta Memorial Library, University of Nairobi, Nairobi 00100 
Tel: +73 2150500, Email: kaseda@kenet.or.ke 

Abstract: eduroam is the secure, world-wide roaming access service developed for 
the international research and education community to address the increasing need 
for fast and secure Internet connection everywhere. With over 6.4 billion 
international authentications to date stretching across 106 countries, eduroam is 
expanding in Africa where National Research and Education Networks (NRENs) are 
going beyond the traditional campus connectivity aiming at bridging the digital 
divide. Uganda, South Africa and Kenya are leading the way and connecting users 
off campus at bus stops, libraries, cafes, and hospitals. NRENs are at the helm of 
Africa’s digital transformation and eduroam is a tangible solution to bridging the 
digital divide. This paper is therefore a guidebook detailing the technology behind 
eduroam, the benefits and the challenges for its four main target groups in Africa: 
users, institutions, NRENs and municipalities. The call for action is to further deploy 
eduroam hotspots and provide connectivity everywhere on the continent, including 
remote areas and unprivileged communities where students, researchers and teachers 
are present. 

Keywords: AfricaConnect, AfricaConnect2, AfricaConnect3, Internet Connectivity, 
Research and Education Community, NRENs, eduroam, digital divide, inclusion, 
ICT4D, eduGAIN, roaming, students, authentication, federation, e-learning, COVID-
19, UbuntuNet Alliance, WACREN, ASREN, GÉANT, RENU, TENET, KENET, 
European Commission. 

1. Introduction  

Students, researchers and lecturers are becoming more and more mobile. They are never 
stationed in one place. Lecturers often teach in different universities or campuses; students 
usually roam between different locations such as libraries, classrooms, hostels, and other 
assembly points; researchers move from place to place, looking for collaborations and 
exchanges. The need for fast and secure Internet connection everywhere has seen a drastic 
increase with the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and the advent of remote working 
and online learning.  
 However, despite the urgent need of users to connect in different locations, institutions 
hardly have the capacity to address wireless network needs. This leaves roaming students 
and staff to resort to insecure practices such as borrowing login details or accessing open 
networks.  
 In this context, eduroam plays a key role in addressing the problem.  

1.1 What is eduroam? 

As the name suggests – it comes from education roaming -, eduroam is the secure, world-
wide roaming access service developed for the international research and education 
community. By simply opening their laptop or picking up their phone and with just one 
profile, users can connect anywhere and anytime when visiting participating institutions. 
 Its main target groups consist of students, researchers, and staff who can benefit from 
the flexibility of obtaining Internet connectivity across campus and abroad, as well as 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 2 of 11 

municipalities who want to respond to the evolving needs of mobile students and break the 
impression that Africa is lagging behind.  

1.2 How it started 

Back in 2002, Klaas Wierenga – then working for SURFnet and now Chief Information & 
Technology Officer at GÉANT – was “getting annoyed by the fact that whenever I visited a 
university I had to register my wireless card or borrow one from the local IT department to 
get online” [1]. After some initial experiments, Klaas turned to what was then called the 
TERENA Task Force on Mobility1, a group of experts from the wider European National 
Research and Education Networks (NRENs) Community, to get feedback and improve his 
ideas.  
 The eduroam initiative launched in 2003 with 6 countries, the Netherlands, Germany, 
Finland, Portugal, Croatia, and the United Kingdom.  
 Twenty years on, eduroam has reached over 6 billion national and international 
authentications [2]. Now eduroam is a project of the pan-European network GÉANT, and it 
receives funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme [3]. Thanks to the global agreement, the eduroam Wi-Fi roaming service is 
free-of-charge to users. The fee for member institutions is covered by the basic fee 
infrastructure that they pay to the respective NREN.  
 What started as a “half-baked” [4] idea to bring a solution to an annoyance is now 
available in 106 territories worldwide, of which 17 are in Africa [5], where users can now 
roam freely and securely from hundreds of hotspots, like cafes, hospitals, campuses, bus 
stations, and libraries. 

 
Figure 1: world eduroam map, September 2022. Source: https://eduroam.org/where/  

1.3 Paper structure 

This paper will address some of the key achievements of eduroam in African countries and 
highlight its crucial role for the continent’s digital transformation. 
 It begins by briefly explaining the technology and governance of eduroam and 
continues to demonstrate its added value detailing the vast array of its applications and 
developments in Africa. It shows the main achievements and impact, with a special focus 
on the key role that eduroam played during the COVID-19 pandemic. It continues to lay out 
                                                 
1 TERENA merged with DANTE to become the GÉANT Association in 2014. The Task Force on Mobility 
moved to become the Task Force on Mobility and Network Middleware. The Task Force ceased to exist when 
the European eduroam confederation was established as part of the GÉANT project. 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 3 of 11 

the benefits for the main target groups: African researchers and students, institutions, 
NRENs, and municipalities. Finally, it discusses the existing challenges that will need to be 
overcome to unlock eduroam’s full potential. 

2. Objectives 

This paper will present the impact of eduroam in African research and education 
communities and will be a useful basis for developing guidelines for stakeholders interested 
in considering and assessing the eduroam service. The ultimate goal is to advocate the case 
for more institutions to adopt the secure, world-wide roaming access service and leave no 
one behind in an increasingly digitalised world. 

3. How does eduroam work? 

The technology behind eduroam is based on the IEEE 802.1X standard and a hierarchy of 
RADIUS proxy servers2 [6]. The abovementioned Task Force on Mobility created a test 
bed to demonstrate the feasibility of combining a RADIUS-based infrastructure with 
802.1X standard technology to provide roaming network access across research and 
education networks. With every successful test, eduroam started gaining momentum in the 
European Community and with other NRENs joining, the infrastructure was eventually 
named eduroam. [7] 
 eduroam allows users from member sites to connect to an authenticated network at any 
other location where the service is enabled. Depending on the policies of each institution, 
users might also have access to additional resources.  
 eduroam is operated as a digital commons, reconfirming the crucial role of 
collaboration in the research and education community. 
 Thanks to its secure and privacy-preserving technology, connecting to eduroam does 
not require entering any credentials. The device will identify a valid eduroam access point 
and login automatically, using pre-configured credentials. The password for the user’s 
online identity is provided by their home institution.  
 The user credentials are kept secure and are not shared with the access point. Instead, 
the credentials are forwarded securely to the user's home institution, where they can be 
verified and validated. The system uses a network of servers run by the institutions, and the 
participating institutions to securely route these requests back to your home institute.  All 
this happens seamlessly, virtually, and instantaneously. 
 Participating organisations can apply their own filtering policies as long as they clearly 
inform users about the rules.  
 All these features make the eduroam service far more secure than typical commercial 
hotspots.  

4. Supporting eduroam globally: governance and participation 

The Global eduroam Governance Committee (GeGC), which comprises of regional 
representatives of roaming operators (ROs) including from Africa, monitors that eduroam 
operators comply with the service’s high technical and organisational standards [8]. 
In order to be authorised to use the eduroam service, institutions need to be part of the 
respective national RO, which, in most cases, is the NREN but it can be any lead institution 

                                                 
2 To read about the details of the eduroam architecture of network roaming, visit https://www.rfc-
editor.org/rfc/rfc7593 (2015, September) 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 4 of 11 

willing to take on the role. It is important to point this out as not all African countries have 
a functioning NREN and yet could join eduroam3. 
 eduroam access can also be made available through public, commercial or city Wi-Fi 
initiatives to broaden access for students.  This is possible because eduroam separates the 
functions of access infrastructure and user authentication in a scalable and secure manner. 
This means that commercial entities cannot become identity providers and offer services to 
their customers that will work via eduroam. Instead, they set up the access infrastructure to 
provide hotspots, which then reintegrate into eduroam through the national ROs. If they 
partner with eduroam, commercial entities cannot charge users of a hotspot for accessing 
the Wi-Fi network. 

5. Target groups 

The four main target groups of eduroam are individual users, institutions, NRENs, as well 
as municipalities in Africa. 

5.1 eduroam for users  

For students, researchers and academic staff, the possibility to turn on their device and 
immediately get high performance, secure Wi-Fi access is a game-changer as it completely 
transforms their learning and work experience. Learners have better chances to excel thanks 
to easy and fast access to good quality Internet and the learning material they need. 

5.2 eduroam for institutions 

As eduroam provides a single solution for all the mobile connectivity requirements of an 
institution, the administrative burden imposed on local IT departments for supporting 
visitors is reduced drastically. Implementing and maintaining eduroam does not cost more 
than deploying any other secure Wi-Fi solution and brings significant cost savings thanks to 
the reduced IT department workload. Not only does it support local users to connect to the 
local network, but it also provides streamlined connectivity to visiting users and allows 
local users to connect to other participating networks.  

5.3 eduroam for African NRENs 

eduroam offers a unique value-added service that NRENs can offer to their member 
institutions for the benefit of the ever-growing mobile audience. With research and 
education becoming increasingly international, eduroam becomes a key tool to enable 
collaboration and mobility by giving students and researchers the ability to roam for free 
across 106 countries around the world. 

5.4 eduroam on city wireless networks 

Many cities across Africa are increasingly focusing on responding to students’ mobility 
needs and are taking active steps to ensure that those students, often from under-privileged 
backgrounds, have equal opportunities. By deploying eduroam on city wireless networks – 
leveraging existing infrastructure and fibre optics - and making it available on multiple 
public hotspots allow students to access study materials closer to their homes and decrease 
the number of journeys to university campuses while, at the same time, reduces the burden 
of high cellular data costs [9]. 
 With eduroam available at public access points, African cities break the impression that 
Africa is lagging behind and instead are world-class destinations for international students 
and academics. The deployment of eduroam in both Cape Town and Kampala (see 8.1 and 

                                                 
3 New institutions can use the eduroam Configuration Assistant Tool (CAT) to help them offer eduroam to 
their users. The tool is customised to support the individual configuration of every campus: 
https://eduroam.org/how/  



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 5 of 11 

8.2) has attracted international attention, and visitors who connect to eduroam in 
unexpected locations praise their experience on various social media. This means there are 
significant direct and indirect public relations opportunities for cities to showcase that they 
care for their research and education community [10]. 

6. Eduroam in Africa 

To date, eduroam is available in 106 territories worldwide, 17 of which are in Africa.  

6.1 AfricaConnect3 support to eduroam in Africa 

The AfricaConnect3 regional Partners -the UbuntuNet Alliance (UA), the West and Central 
African Research and Education Network (WACREN) and the Arab States Research and 
Education Network (ASREN)4, played a crucial role in implementing eduroam across the 
African continent. They established an African eduroam confederation that resulted in the 
deployment of regional proxy servers in Johannesburg, South Africa and Lagos, Nigeria 
which not only improved the quality of service but also provided community support for 
NREN roaming operators. 

The Partners also work with NRENs in the region and support them where necessary in 
deploying the service. The activity will also include enhancements of the service in those 
NRENs where the service already exists and where further work needs to be done on the 
NROs.  

In particular, during the first year of implementation, AfricaConnect3 supported 7 
NRENs. In Eastern and Southern African, UA supported EthERNet and MAREN by 
enhancing their eduroam service, both NRENs already had some eduroam infrastructure 
that was not operating optimally.  

In Western and Central Africa, 3 WACREN NRENs in Benin, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo 
received support.  

In North Africa, all 4 ASREN member NRENs received support to deploy eduroam. 
During the reporting period, the NRENs continued to maintain and to enhance their 
eduroam services. Algeria and Morocco, for instance, continued to roll out eduroam and 
identity federation services. Egypt deployed eduroam services at EUN premises and efforts 
are underway to deploy at universities. Tunisia is in the eduroam pilot phase. 

By 2020, NRENs in Africa had supported the deployment of eduroam in 151 
institutions (116 in UA, 30 in WACREN and 5 in ASREN) and 303 locations. As of 
February 2023, the numbers of connected institutions have increased to 205 and locations to 
345. By the end of the project in 2023, they aim at deploying eduroam in a total of 267 
institutions5.  

National Roaming 
Operators 

Country No. of eduroam 
Service 
Locations6 

No. of eduroam 
Identity 
Providers 

No. of eduroam 
Service 
Providers 

UA  
1 EthERNet Etiophia 1 2 2

2 KENET Kenya 43 43 43
3 iRENALA Madagascar 1 3 1
4 MAREN Malawi 3 4 4
5 MoRENet Mozambique - 1 1

                                                 
4 More information about the AfricaConnect project and its third and current phase, AfricaConnect3, can be 
found at https://africaconnect3.net/  
5 These data have been sourced from the AfricaConnect3 project’s interim reports. 
6 While a service provider is a federation partner that provides services to the end user, an identity provider 
manages and authenticates the user identity. Service locations, also known as hotspots, are the sites where the 
user can connect to the eduroam network, i.e. a school, a library, a café, a bus station, etc. 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 6 of 11 

6 TENET South Africa 169 44 46
7 TERNET Tanzania 5 8 4
8 RENU Uganda 427 89 16
9 ZAMREN Zambia - 73 72
WACREN 
10 BeninRER Benin N/A N/A N/A
11 GARNET Ghana 75 4 4
12 NgREN Nigeria - 7 6
13 SnRER Senegal N/A N/A N/A
14 TogoRER Togo N/A N/A N/A
ASREN 
15 MARWAN Morocco 6 6 6
16 ARN Algeria N/A N/A N/A
Total 345 284 205

Table 1: eduroam rollout in Africa as of February 2023. Source: www.monitor.eduroam.org. KENET figures 
were sources from https://eduroam.ac.ke/  

7. Case Studies 

While traditionally eduroam is mainly present on university campuses, African NRENs are 
more and more innovative and committed to bridge the digital divide and offer connectivity 
wherever students are. 

The following case studies are examples of good practice in the countries of Uganda, 
South Africa and Kenya that can potentially be adopted elsewhere.   

7.1 Connecting off campus with metro eduroam in Uganda 

Since the COVID-19 pandemic broke out in 2020, institutions have been experiencing 
learning disruptions and have had to quickly adapt to the needs of their students being away 
from campus. To support their member institutions switching to online learning and their 
students and staff studying and working off-campus, on 1st September 2020 the Research 
and Education Network of Uganda (RENU), launched metro eduroam, an unprecedented 
initiative in the continent that allows students, university staff, and researchers to access 
free and secure wireless Internet connectivity off-campus [11].  
 Users with an eduroam profile can connect in over 400 locations countrywide at no 
cost. The number of available hotspots and participating institutions is rapidly increasing 
[12]. 
 Since the launch of Metro eduroam, as of August 2022, 37 institutions joined the 
initiative and 609,916 successful logins have been registered, out of which 1,556 are 
unique, with the average daily peak traffic being 33.37 Mbps8.  
 Metro eduroam has also seen challenges. A fundamental requirement to adopt the 
eduroam service is for the institution to have a user database under their institutional 
domain, but this is not always available. The institutional user database is used for 
managing eduroam authentications at any hotspot. As an alternative solution, the RENU 
team is exploring a managed Identity Provider (Managed IdP) solution, which would free 
institutions from the burden of having to set up costly user database to benefit from the 
eduroam service.  
 Building on the success of metro eduroam and in an effort to address the limitation of 
coverage, in September 2022 RENU launched eduroam on the Go, a pocket-size routing 
device that enables researchers and university staff to connect to eduroam fulltime and not 
only from a few fixed locations. eduroam on the Go works with the same authentication 

                                                 
7 This does not include the number of service locations for metro eduroam and eduroam on the go. 
8 Locations can be checked at https://eduroam.renu.ac.ug/ 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 7 of 11 

infrastructure as eduroam and metro eduroam, so the features of security and gratuity for 
the users remain unchanged. Researchers, students and academic staff from RENU member 
institutions can enjoy unlimited data connection while on the move. [13] 

7.2 Connecting public libraries and hospitals with eduroam in South Africa 

In June 2019 the City of Cape Town and the Tertiary Education and Research Network of 
South Africa (TENET), installed eduroam in 57 of Cape Town’s public libraries [14]. This 
has given access to students and staff from any university which uses eduroam, including 
all four of the public universities in the Western Cape (Cape Peninsula University of 
Technology, Stellenbosch University, University of Cape Town and the University of the 
Western Cape), to their institution’s high-speed Internet network from local libraries. This 
way students not only reduce their travel time to campuses but also drastically reduce their 
mobile data bills. 
 Only in the first week of eduroam use in the Cape Town, eduroam saw over 15,000 
authentications from 121 institutions including users from Europe, Asia, America, and 
Oceania. This is indicative of the reach of the eduroam service. 
 More recently in 2021, TENET worked with the Western Cape Government, an 
initiative by Stellenbosch University, to pilot the roll out of eduroam to four hospitals in the 
Western Cape [15]. The pilot was successful, and plans are underway to expand it to other 
hospitals in the area and also in the Gauteng provincial government.  
 The 2019 Statistics South Africa General Household survey revealed that less than one-
tenth (9,1%) of South African households had access to the Internet at home [16]. The 
COVID-19 crisis has really amplified the impact of the gaping digital divide in the country 
with many students battling high data costs and poor Internet connection. TENET’s 
eduroam initiatives do not only address the universal right to affordable connectivity but are 
serve the South African research and education community by giving institutions and users 
the means to be active contributors. Rolling out eduroam to public libraries shows that they 
play a crucial role in democratising access to information and, therefore, creating 
opportunities to participate as active digital citizens [17]. 

7.3 Connecting students’ halls of residences with eduroam in Kenya 

The Kenyan Education Network (KENET) implemented its first eduroam deployment in 
2010 and has since then activated eduroam in 44 universities and colleges [18]. 
Traditionally, eduroam Wi-Fi locations were situated in libraries and areas where students, 
staff and researchers would normally converge at while on-campus. 
 Over the years and with the adoption of blended learning due to the COVID-19 
pandemic, there has been an increased need for students to access to connectivity off-
campus to, for example, attend classes virtually while at their hostels or halls of residence. 
Oftentimes, the halls of residence that are located inside the university lack both cables and 
wireless connectivity and those that are off-campus face similar challenges. 
 In order to find a solution to this problem, in 2022 KENET, in collaboration with 
selected universities, deployed the first ever cloud based OpenWifi architecture in Africa by 
extending Wi-Fi coverage of student learning spaces, lecturer halls, and hostels at main 
campus of Kenyatta University, in Nairobi, Kenya [19].  
 The expansion extended the reach of eduroam to at least 1,700 additional students 
residing at the halls of residence at Kenyatta University with a capacity of supporting 
approximately 14,000 concurrent connections, mostly within and around the hostels. This 
expansion also increased the eduroam coverage at Kenyatta University to 90% of the 
students within the university9. 
                                                 
9 This information is not public but based on factual knowledge on KENET’s knowledge of the project and its 
outcomes.  



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 8 of 11 

 KENET has also extended eduroam to students’ hostels at Jomo Kenyatta University of 
Agriculture and Technology as well as Laikipia University with an aim of providing 
ubiquitous connectivity to students while on campus and also at their halls of residence in 
order to promote seamless learning and access to educational resources. 

8. Challenges 

If properly harnessed, eduroam can provide both students and lecturers access to a wealth 
of invaluable educational resources. Lecturers can use the Internet to prepare lessons, 
disseminate information to students and assess them, and students can access online content 
to extend their range of learning.   
 With the recent focus on e-learning methods and connectivity, especially since the 
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, eduroam has proved its crucial role within the 
research and education community. However, many challenges still exist and need to be 
overcome. 

8.1 Limited locations in Africa 

With only 17 African countries with access to eduroam in 345 locations, the potential of 
eduroam is not yet fully unlocked on the continent. NRENs in Africa need support, need to 
go beyond standard practice, use existing case studies, and continue to be innovative to 
bring connectivity where needed to all students, researchers, and lecturers. 
 Remote and rural areas often do not yet have access to eduroam due to several of the 
challenges highlighted below.  

8.2 Insufficient and unaffordable connectivity  

Despite availability of infrastructures having significantly progressed over the recent years - 
especially through the deployment of international undersea cables circling Africa, tertiary 
education and research institutions in Africa are still among the least connected in the 
academic world, a situation that is particularly critical for landlocked countries.  
 Overall, African education and research communities suffer from very low Internet 
penetration levels as well as from very high connectivity prices, a situation compounded by 
the presence of telecom monopolies or market dominance by a single player and a weak 
regulatory environment [20]. As a result, those factors translate into a general 
disconnectedness of the continent from the global digital economy and all its opportunities.  
 In order for eduroam to operate optimally, sufficient connectivity need to be provided 
by the institutions to the students, but, in practice, institutions often consume the 
connectivity they can afford rather than the connectivity that they need.  
Furthermore, small coverage areas can be improved by increasing the number of access 
points, but this could lead to overwhelming the already insufficient bandwidth in some 
institutions. 

8.3 Devices and technical challenges 

In addition to sufficient connectivity at the hotspot level, eduroam requires students, 
educators and researchers to have access to IT devices. Nevertheless, according to the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU), the proportion of households in Africa with 
access to a computer is 9%, compared to over 75% of households in Europe [21]. This 
digital gap was particularly noticeable during the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, while the 
rest of the world moved their classes online, millions of students and researchers on the 
continent were disconnected and could not access e-learning solutions due to lack of 
affordable equipment. 

In addition to the lack of equipment eduroam needs to be compatible with the 
equipment most commonly purchased on the continent. In fact, according to the State of the 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 9 of 11 

ICT Sector Report in South Africa, smartphone penetration reached over 91% in 2019 [22]. 
However, some devices using the legacy wireless adapter cards may not work with 
eduroam authentication processes. Hence, it is crucial for the GeGC and the local IT 
personnel to be always very attentive that new eduroam updates are compatible with IT 
equipment purchased in the continent. The eduroam community could develop guidelines to 
standardise the testing of devices for compatibility, including setting up an interest group 
with a mandate of testing and providing reports on device compatibility.  

8.4 Implementation challenges 

ICT policies vary depending on the institution. This means that while some institutions may 
allow traffic from certain sources (i.e. YouTube or torrents), others may not, creating 
confusion among the users about the services and sources they can access through eduroam. 
Therefore, there is a need to create a standardised ICT policy to effectively regulate how 
eduroam users can access the services. [23] 

Another implementation issue is that, before the authentication takes place, a pre-
configured key is shared between RADIUS entities but it needs to go through several other 
servers to reach the intended authorising one if the user is roaming. With this approach, if 
there is just one point of failure in the authentication process, the user cannot access the 
service. This issue creates the need to have redundant links within the network to avoid one 
point of failure when authenticating users of eduroam. [24] 

8.5 Human resources and capacity building 

Engineers and experts with the right IT skills to deploy, operate and maintain eduroam is 
essential. Nevertheless, these skills are not always available at a campus or institution level, 
this is even stronger in remote and rural areas. In addition, higher education institutions 
have a high staff turnover, which plays a significant role in the amount of regular training 
that they will need to invest in.  

Therefore, the support provided by NRENs is essential, as in several African countries 
the NREN organises trainings and provide direct engineering assistance to institutions. 
Institutions can also partner with external trainers and other institutions more experienced 
in eduroam deployment in order to enhance the human capacity with the aim of reducing 
the skills gap relating to design, implementation and operation of eduroam infrastructure. 

8.6 eduroam awareness raising  

Some users are not willing to connect to unknown networks from other institutions, 
anticipating security issues. Therefore, there is a need to raise awareness among students 
about eduroam and its secure mode of operation as well as the nearest access point, 
especially if it is not necessarily in their own institution. Conversely, many students are 
willing to share access codes with others. Because eduroam credentials are often the 
student’s primary access credential for many services, this activity needs to be discouraged 
through the awareness programme.  

9.  Conclusions 

This paper provides background information and points to additional material to assist 
NRENs and their member institutions that are considering rolling out eduroam in their 
countries, find information on how the eduroam technology works as well as case studies to 
showcase its value and examples of good practice.  

With the global research and education community being ever so mobile and the drastic 
switch to online learning since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is no better 
moment in time to roll out eduroam. Although eduroam was originally meant to be 
deployed on campus only, in recent years there has been a realisation that, students and 



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 10 of 11 

researchers need connectivity off-campus as much as on-campus– whether they are 
studying in their accommodations or visiting a library to do some research.  

As a consequence, there have been efforts to deploy eduroam in public spaces and 
locations other than university campuses. This paper calls for support and action to further 
deploy hotspots and provide connectivity everywhere on the continent including remote 
areas and unprivileged communities.  

Thanks to its secure encryption and authentication standards, the eduroam roaming 
service is safer than that of commercial providers. This, together with its low 
implementation and maintenance costs, worldwide presence and easy login experience, 
makes it a tangible solution for institutions and NRENs to contribute to bridging the digital 
divide and offer connectivity to their students and staff. 

NRENs are transforming the deployment of and access to digital technologies in Africa. 
Their work and impact on the community could leapfrog and be fully integrated to the 
fourth industrial revolution if they bridge the gap with affordable, dedicated, secure and 
sufficient connectivity for researchers and students.  

Students, researchers and academic staff of eduroam member institutions can check the 
closest access points and all the available local hotspots in their respective regions on the 
eduroam website. NRENs and institutions that are interested in deploying eduroam can 
contact their respective regional networks (UA, WACREN or ASREN). 

Acknowledgments 

The AfricaConnect3 project is run in collaboration between the European Union, the pan-
European networking organisation GÉANT and the three regional partners supporting local 
research and education networking across Africa: UbuntuNet Alliance (Eastern and 
Southern Africa), WACREN (Western and Central Africa) and ASREN (Northern Africa 
and Middle East Arab countries).  

AfricaConnect3 builds on the work carried out by AfricaConnect and AfricaConnect2 
and aims to foster the creation and consolidation of national and regional research and 
education (R&E) networks across Africa that provide access to dedicated, high-capacity 
Internet connectivity and offer a gateway to global R&E collaborations through their 
interconnection with the pan-European GÉANT network. 

The total budget for AfricaConnect3 is 37.5 million euros for a period of 4 years from 
November 2019, with 30 million euros contributed by the European Commission (DG 
INTPA). The remaining funds (€7.5m) are being provided by the African partners. In each 
cluster, partners are responsible for their own grant agreement with the European 
Commission whilst GÉANT together with the partners is tasked with the overall project 
coordination role, including the procurement of connectivity and equipment for all clusters. 

As part of the GÉANT 2020 Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA), eduroam 
receives funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under Grant Agreement No. 856726 (GN4-3). 

The authors would also like to acknowledge the precious inputs received by Guy Halse, 
Head of Trust & Identity at TENET; Klaas Wierenga, Chief Information & Technology 
Officer at GÉANT; and Karl Meyer, Product Marketing Manager at GÉANT. 

References 
 [1]  “eduroam celebrates a decade of providing secure roaming internet access for users”, RealWire, 24 

May 2012 (https://www.realwire.com/releases/eduroam-celebrates-a-decade-of-providing-secure-
roaming-Internet-access-for-users)  

[2]  Eduroam (2023, 14 February) Twitter post https://twitter.com/eduroam/status/1625466091181953025 
[3]  Eduroam, https://eduroam.org/  



 

Copyright © 2023 The authors www.IST-Africa.org/Conference2023 Page 11 of 11 

[4]  “eduroam celebrates a decade of providing secure roaming internet access for users”, RealWire, 24 
May 2012 (https://www.realwire.com/releases/eduroam-celebrates-a-decade-of-providing-secure-
roaming-Internet-access-for-users) 

[5]  Eduroam, https://eduroam.org/where/  
[6]  Eduroam, https://eduroam.org/faqs/ 
[7]  RealWire, 24 May 2012 
[8]  Eduroam, https://eduroam.org/about/  
[9] Making eduroam available on city wireless networks, TENET July 2019  

https://eduroam.ac.za/static/TENET-eduroam-on-city-WiFi-Case-Study-20190725.pdf  
[10] Making eduroam available on city wireless networks, TENET July 2019  

https://eduroam.ac.za/static/TENET-eduroam-on-city-WiFi-Case-Study-20190725.pdf  
[11]  Metro eduroam at One Year, RENU website (https://renu.ac.ug/metro-turns-one.html)  
[12]  Metro eduroam at One Year, RENU website (https://renu.ac.ug/metro-turns-one.html)  
[13]  eduroam on the Go Anytime, Anywhere, RENU website (https://renu.ac.ug/eduroam-OTG.html)  
[14]  South African students can now access high-speed WiFi in city of Cape Town's libraries, TENET 

website July 2019 (https://www.tenet.ac.za/news/eduroam-coct-libraries-jul-2019) 
[15] Rolling out eduroam for medical staff and students, TENET website March 2022 

(https://www.tenet.ac.za/news/rolling-out-eduroam-for-medical-staff-and-students)  
[16] General Household Survey, Department of Statistics South Africa, December 2020 

(https://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0318/P03182019.pdf) 
[17] Rolling out eduroam for medical staff and students TENET website March 2022 

(https://www.tenet.ac.za/news/rolling-out-eduroam-for-medical-staff-and-students) 
[18]  Eduroam KENET https://eduroam.ac.ke/  
[19]  KENET deploys first commercial OpenWifi solution in Africa (https://www.kenet.or.ke/content/kenet-

deploys-first-commercial-openwifi-solution-africa-0) 
[20]  Africa's Pulse, No. 19, April 2019: An Analysis of Issues Shaping Africa’s Economic Future 
[21]  Measuring digital development – Facts and Figures 2020, International Communication Union  
[22]  The State of ICT Sector Report in South Africa, March 2020, ICASA 
[23]  Wierenga, K and Florio, L (2005) ‘Eduroam: past, present and future’ Computational Methods in 

Science and Technology, 11(2) pp. 169-173. 
[24]  Chembe C, Kunda D, Simfukwe M (2014) “Challenges and Benefits of Educational Roaming 

(eduroam) Service to ZAMREN Member Institutions” 
https://repository.ubuntunet.net/bitstream/handle/10.20374/144/chembec.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=
y   


