
Report
African Standards and Guidelines 
for Quality Assurance awareness 
in Africa 
Outcome of the Quality Assurance Network 
Dissemination Project

Implemented by 
RAFANAQ, EAQAN, 
CNAQ
Supported by the 
HAQAA2 Initiative



30/01/2023 

Global report of the HAQAA2 QA Network Dissemination Project on the ASG-QA 
implemented by RAFANAQ, EAQAN, CNAQ 
supported by the HAQAA2 Initiative 
 

Table of Contents 

1. Introduction ................................................................................................................... 1 

2. Methodology ................................................................................................................. 5 

Mapping methodology: ................................................................................................................. 5 

Presentation of results .................................................................................................................. 7 
Presentation of Global Results for the mapping .................................................................................................. 7 
Presentation of CAMES results .......................................................................................................................... 21 
Presentation of IUCEA results ............................................................................................................................ 22 
Limitations of the results obtained .................................................................................................................... 23 

Methodology for the implementation of dissemination activities ................................................. 23 

3. Analysis of the results of the mapping study and implementation of dissemination 
activities ............................................................................................................................. 24 
 

 

1. Introduction  
 
As a follow-up to the development of the African Standards and Guidelines for Quality 
Assurance (ASG-QA) under the HAQAA initiative (Harmonisation, Quality Assurance and 
Accreditation in Africa), initiated by the European Union in the context of the Africa-EU 
Partnership, many activities were carried out by the implementing consortium of HAQAA 
and stakeholders, to promote and implement the ASG-QA. For example, evaluations of 
quality assurance agencies and ‘consultancy visits’ to emergent agencies were organised 
in some African countries to test the relevance of the ASG-QA and to give the structures 
of the countries concerned the opportunity to position themselves in relation to them. To 
further facilitate the use of the ASG-QA, a Guide on how to use the ASG-QA in higher 
education institutions and quality assurance agencies was developed. And, as the first 
collective initiative across linguistic lines, a dissemination activity of three organisations 
from different African regions was launched in the last year of the second phase of the 
HAQAA Initiative, to assess the widespread use of the ASG-QA in Africa.  
 
This project, hereafter called the ‘QA Network dissemination project’, was implemented 
by two QA networks and one national QA Agency, namely the Francophone African 
Network of National Quality Assurance Agencies (RAFANAQ), the East African Quality 



30/01/2023 

Assurance Network (EAQAN) and the National Quality Assurance Council of 
Mozambique (CNAQ) 
representing the Portuguese speaking area.  
 

• The Francophone African Network of National Quality Assurance Agencies 
(RAFANAQ) was created in 2020 in Dakar, Senegal following the international 
meeting of the UNESCO Shenzhen Project. It is a network whose mission is to 
contribute to assuring and improving the quality of higher education by 
strengthening the work of national quality assurance agencies and other structures 
with similar objectives. The main objectives of the network include: promoting the 
development of quality assurance, fostering collaboration and sharing good 
practice, and supporting its members. Currently, RAFANAQ has eight full 
members consisting of national quality assurance agencies from Burundi, Guinea, 
Mali, Morocco, Mauritania, Niger, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Senegal and 
Togo. It also includes ministerial entities in charge of quality assurance from 
different national agencies admitted as associate members and entities 
participating in its activities from Algeria, Burkina Faso, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, 
Gabon, Madagascar, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad and Tunisia.  
 

• The East African Higher Education Quality Assurance Network (EAQAN) is a 
network of quality assurance practitioners in the East African Community Partner 
States (EAC) that was formally established in 2012. The vision of the EAQAN is to 
be an internationally recognised network of quality assurance practitioners in East 
Africa and the mission is to promote, enhance and improve the quality of HE in 
East Africa through the implementation of quality assurance activities. The history 
of the EAQAN can be traced back to 2007 and 2008 when the Inter University 
Council for East Africa (IUCEA), German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD), 
the German Rectors Conference (HRK), East African partner states and National 
Commissions and Councils selected and trained over 45 quality assurance 
officers/coordinators from Universities and National Commissions and councils. 
The training of quality assurance/coordinators was part of the capacity-building 
process to strengthen the internal QA (quality assurance) systems in universities 
in East Africa. The membership to EAQAN include national quality assurance 
networks of universities and higher education institutions within the partner states; 
universities and higher education institutions that are members of IUCEA; national 
commissions and councils responsible for ensuring quality of higher education in 
the partner states; and individuals actively involved in higher education quality 
assurance initiatives in the East African partner states. The EAQAN, in conjunction 
with IUCEA, DAAD, HRK, HAQAA2, National Commissions/Councils and other 
key strategic partners, has since its establishment, has among others, organised 
11 Annual QA forums hosted in partner states and 10th Annual General Assembly 
of the EAQAN. The forums provide the opportunity for EAQAN members and 
higher education experts from the continent and beyond to present papers on key 
issues of quality assurance systems, practices and challenges in the region, 



30/01/2023 

receive further training to build capacity on enhancing internal QA in their 
education institutions and network with other regional and international QA 
practitioners and experts in higher education. 
 

• CNAQ- The National Council for Quality Assurance in Higher Education in 
Mozambique is a public organization, created in 2007 through Decrees 64/2007 
of 31 December as the implementing and supervisory body for the national quality 
assurance framework in the country designated as the National System of 
Evaluation, Accreditation and Quality Assurance of Higher Education (SINAQES) 
that was established through Decrees 63/2007 of 31 December. CNAQ is a 
statutory body supervised by the Minister of Education (from 2007 to 2014). After 
the general elections of 2014, the Mozambique Government structure was 
modified and CNAQ is now under supervision of the Minister of Science 
Technology and Higher Education (MCTES). CNAQ’s was established with the 
vision to be a reference institution for the evaluation, accreditation and quality 
assurance of higher education in the country, in the region and internationally. 
CNAQ’s mission is to promote the assessment and accreditation of study 
programmes and higher education institutions and to promote quality assurance 
mechanisms in line with the country's development needs and in line with the 
quality standards of higher education in the region and in the world (CNAQ, 2016). 
The key functions of CNAQ, as established in Decree 64/2007, are to implement 
and supervise SINAQES and to ensure the harmony, cohesion and credibility of 
SINAQES through: i) conducting external evaluations of HEIs, ii) conducting 
accreditation of HEIs; and iii) participating in the promotion of quality assurance of 
higher education in Mozambique. In 2018, Mozambique government introduced 
norms for prior accreditation of programs and HEIs mainly as an instrument to 
ensure that new HE providers meet the minimum standards of quality. CNAQ has 
now been appointed as the agency who intervenes in this process of prior 
accreditation of HEIs and programs, together with the Ministry of Higher Education. 
Additionally, CNAQ has been called to act as the implementing and monitoring 
entity of the National Qualification Framework for Higher Education (QUANQES- 
Quadro Nacional de Qualificações do Ensino Superior). 

 
 
The three organisations implemented the project jointly, in order to support the 
development and harmonisation of quality assurance in Africa through the dissemination 
of the ASG-QA. This project was funded by HAQAA2, as part of a wider selection of 
dissemination projects that gradates of HAQAA2 training courses on external and internal 
quality assurance were awarded.  

 
The dissemination project also involved important regional organisations like CAMES 
and IUCEA:  

 



30/01/2023 

• The African and Malagasy Council for Higher Education (CAMES) is an 
intergovernmental body promoting excellence and harmonisation of higher 
education and quality assurance in its area. It brings together nineteen French-
speaking African and Malagasy countries. CAMES has developed, among other 
things, tools for institutional evaluation and training programmes. It evaluates 
institutions and training programmes within the framework of its Programme for the 
Recognition and Equivalence of Diplomas (PRED). 

• IUCEA is a strategic institution of the East African Community (EAC) that was 
established in 1970. It is responsible for the coordination of harmonisation of 
Higher Education and Research in the EAC. In collaboration with national 
commissions and councils for higher education, universities and higher education 
institutions within the EAC partner states, quality assurance experts, professional 
bodies, experts from academia and industry, and higher education stakeholders, 
the IUCEA among others coordinates development and establishment of regional 
quality assurance guidelines. The IUCEA is also involved as a strategic partner in 
the implementation of the continental higher education quality assurance initiatives 
such as the development of the ASG-QA among others.  

 
 
Components of the QA Network Dissemination Project:  

 
The project had two components, namely a mapping phase, followed by a set of 
dissemination activities. Involved in these activities were  

• 6 members of RAFANAQ (CNES of Burundi, ANAQ-Guinea, AMAQ-Sup of Mali, 
ANEAQ of Morocco, ANAQ-Sup of Senegal and ANAQ-ESU of DRC and CAMES) 

• 6 member countries of the EAC (Burundi, Uganda, Tanzania, South Sudan, Kenya 
and Rwanda) and at the level of the EAC regional higher education organisation, 
the Inter-University Council for East Africa (IUCEA).  

• 4 members countries piloted by the Mozambican Quality Assurance Council -
CNAQ (Mozambique, Angola, South Africa, Cape Verde). Representatives from 
Zimbabwe and São Tomé Principe were contacted several times, did not return 
the survey forms.  

 
The objective of the proposed mapping was to foster and support country and 
subregional ownership of the ASG-QA through a reflective exercise on their own 
quality assurance practices in the light of the ASG-QA.  
 
All three parts of the ASG-QA were covered:  Part A- internal QA, Part B - external QA 
and Part C - internal QA for QA agencies (ASG-QA Part C).  
 
The aim of the second component of the project, the dissemination activities, was to share 
the results of this mapping and to use this opportunity to further explain and disseminate 
the ASG-QA, how they can be used by HEIs as well as QA Agencies as a tool to 
strengthen QA practices. Annual meeting of the networks were used as an opportunity to 



30/01/2023 

share the results of the mapping, involve stakeholders and inform about the ASG-QA. 
Furthermore, HAQAA2 events were also used for stakeholder buy-in and multiplication. 

 
In summary, the purpose of the dissemination project was to: 

 
● To raise awareness and understanding of the ASG-QA  
● To enhance societal acceptance of the ASG-QA 
● To effectively communicate the shared roles in implementation of the ASG-

QA  
● To provide mechanisms to encourage stakeholder involvement and more 

buy-in from stakeholders  
● To provide a mechanism for CNAQ, RAFANAQ and EAQAN to engage with 

key stakeholders on matters related to the ASG-QA 
 
 

2. Methodology  
This section describes the methodology for each of the project components, namely 
mapping and implementation of dissemination activities. 
 

Mapping methodology: 
The mapping phase of the ASG-QA was carried out through a survey of national quality 
assurance structures and sub-regional organisations in the higher education sector. 

 
Objective of the mapping methodology: 
 

The objective of the proposed mapping methodology was to foster and support country 
and sub-regional ownership of the ASG-QA through a reflective exercise on their own 
quality assurance practices in light of the ASG-QA. It was not meant to be an evaluation 
nor a full a self-assessment, though several of the countries that participated were also 
taking part in an agency review or consultancy visit under HAQAA2, and hence has been 
able to undergo a deeper reflection. Finally, it is important to underline that there has 
been no training related to the compliance of the ASG-QA with quality assurance 
practices for the participating agencies.  

 
Elements of the methodology 

The reflective exercise was the following: A survey was sent out to the participating QAA 
of each network. The national QAAs were asked to have a look at their own national 
guidelines and compare them with the ASG-QA. The criteria to select the countries that 
participated in the study included the available budget and the level of development of 



30/01/2023 

the national quality assurance systems and frameworks. It is in this regard that the 
number of participating countries was limited to 6 countries per network/region. 
Also, IUCEA and CAMES were asked to fill out the survey, so that these two important 
regional organisations could reflect on existing QA standards.  
The results on national and subregional level were analysed to be able to compare the 
results between different regions.  

 
Implementation team: 

A coordination committee of 3 members led by the RAFANAQ, with 1 member from each 
of the participating networks (RAFANAQ, EAQAN and CNAQ) was set up to coordinate 
the project activities. In addition, for each participating network, two experts were 
recruited to cover 3 countries out of the 6 participating countries. This meant that the 
implementation team included 3 coordinators headed by RAFANAQ and 6 experts. 
CAMES and IUCEA each had 1 Focal Person, which made a total of 8 experts. Each 
expert relied on focal points appointed by the heads of the national quality assurance 
agencies that participated in the study to follow-up on filling the survey tool that was used 
for the mapping phase and to prepare a report for their allocated countries. 

 
Data collection tool  

A matrix was designed in line with the project objective, to let the quality assurance 
agencies to reflect on their quality assurance guidelines and practices. In fact, for part A, 
a questionnaire listing the various references and guidelines was drawn up with a scale 
of 1 to 5 relating to the level of alignment. However, for parts B and C, open questions 
were formulated to better take into account the different realities and practices.  

 
Collection, processing and analysis of the study data and expected results 
 

The collection, processing and analysis of the data was carried out first at country level 
and each expert produced reports where they summed up the results of 3 countries. 
RAFANAQ produced 2 reports, each report including 3 countries,  plus one for CAMES; 
EAQAN produced 2 reports plus one for IUCEA and CNAQ produced 2 reports. Each 
network compiled the data to produce a network report. The first expected result was that 
each network or linguistic area was to produce a report comparing and positioning its 
structures in charge of quality assurance in relation to ASG-QA. 
 
The second expected result was the production of this report, a global report on the 
positioning and comparison of the networks and language areas regarding the 
implementation of the ASG-QA. This report is translated to be available in English, 
French, and Portuguese. 
 



30/01/2023 

Presentation of results  
The results are presented first for mapping and then for the implementation of 
dissemination activities.  
 

Presentation of Global Results for the mapping 
 

Part A: 
 

The results in Table 1 are a consolidation of the findings of the mapping of ASG-QA at 
the level of the QA/linguistic area networks of RAFANAQ, EAQAN and 
CNAQ/Lusophone. They reflect the perceived state of alignment of the ASG-QA with the 
internal QA guidelines established by the Commissions or Agencies responsible for 
higher education in the countries that participated in the ASG-QA mapping.  Five equals 
very aligned and one equals not aligned. 



30/01/2023 

 
 

Table 1: Alignment of the ASG-QA with the Internal Quality Assurance Guidelines 
 
 

Référence
s 

Buru
ndi 

Gui
née 

M
al
i 

Ma
roc 

Séné
gal 

R
D
C 

Ke
nya 

Rwa
nda 

Tanz
ania 

Uga
nda 

S. 
Su
dan 

Ang
ola 
  

Ca
bo 
Ve
rd
e 
  

Mozamb
ique 
  

 
So
uth 
Afri
ca 
  

1. Vision, 
Mission 
and 
Strategic 
Objective
s 

5 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 4 5 4 4 5 

2. 
Governan
ce and 
Managem
ent 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 5 5 



30/01/2023 

3. Human 
Resource
s 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 5 5 

4. 
Financial 
Resource 
Managem
ent 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 5 5 

5. 
Infrastruc
ture and 
Facilities 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 4 4 3 5 5 

6. Student 
Recruitme
nt, 
Admissio
n, 
Certificati
on and 
Support 
Services 

4 5 4 5 4 NR 5 5 4 5 4 4 3 5 4 



30/01/2023 

7. Design, 
Approval, 
Monitorin
g and 
Evaluatio
n of Study 
Program
mes 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 3 4 3 4 5 

8. 
Teaching, 
Learning 
and 
Assessm
ent 

4 5 5 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 3 4 4 4 4 

9. 
Research 
and 
Innovatio
n 

4 4 4 5 5 NR 5 5 5 5 4 1 - 4 4 

10. 
Communi
ty 

5 5 5 5 3 NR 5 5 5 5 4 4 - 4 4 



30/01/2023 

Engagem
ent 

11. 
Informatio
n 
Managem
ent 
System 

5 4 5 5 5 NR 5 4 5 5 4 4 3 4 4 

12. Public 
Communi
cation 

5 4 4 5 5 NR 5 4 4 5 5 4 - 3 1 

13. 
Collabora
tion, Staff 
and 
Student 
Mobility 

4 4 4 5 5 NR 5 4 4 5 4 1 - 5 1 

NR – Not Responded  
 
 



30/01/2023 

 
The mapping within RAFANAQ shows that only one country out of the 6 did not respond. 
For all references, the lowest level of alignment is 3. For the respondents, for each 
reference, at least 2 countries thought they were perfectly aligned and sometimes the 
alignment is noted for all categories (e.g. vision, mission and strategic objectives). The 
lowest level of alignment is 3 and it is scored only once and concerns the commitment to 
the community.   

 
The findings on the alignment of the ASG-QA with the Internal QA Guidelines established 
by commissions or agency responsible for regulation of higher education indicates that 
the five commissions/councils the HEC-Rwanda, TCU- Tanzania, CUE- Kenya, and 
NCHE- Uganda were most aligned with the ASG-QA and the NCHE-South Sudan was 
aligned in some aspects.  All commissions/councils indicated the need for continuous 
awareness of the ASG-QA, with NCHE-South Sudan specifying need of more training in 
Quality Assurance in general.  

 
At the level of CNAQ/Lusophone, the alignment of standard 1 on Vision, Mission and 
Strategic Objectives in Part A, INAAREES (Angola) and CHE (South Africa) reported the 
level of alignment of 5, while ARES (Cabo Verde) and CNAQ (Moçambique) reported 4. 
The level of alignment for CNAQ and CHE for standard 2 in Part A on Governance and 
Management is 5, and for Angola and Cabo Verde, the level of alignment is 4. The results 
at the level of network/linguistic zone are in the relevant reports in Annex.  
 
 

 



30/01/2023 

Part B: External Quality Assurance 
 

The results in Table 2 are a consolidation of the findings from the Mapping of the ASG-QA at the level of the QA Networks/Linguistic 
zone of the RAFANAQ, EAQAN and the CNAQ/Lusophone. They reflect the extent of compliance with Methodologies (or Standards) 
used by commissions/councils for higher education to ensure internal quality assurance in line with the standards 1 to 7 of Part B of the 
ASG-QA.  
 

 
Table 2: The extent of compliance with Methodologies (or Standards) to ensure Internal Quality Assurance 
 

Standard Buru
ndi 

Guin
ée 

M
al
i 

Mar
oc 

Séné
gal 

RDC Ken
ya 

Rwan
da 

Tanza
nia 

Ugan
da 

S. 
Sud
an 

Ang
ola 
  

Cabo 
Verde 
  

Mozam
bique 
  

 South 
Africa 
  

Objective
s of 
External 
Quality 
Assuranc
e and 
consider
ation for 
Internal 
Quality 
Assuranc

√ √ √   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 



30/01/2023 

e 
Purpose. 

Designin
g 
External 
Quality 
Assuranc
e 
Mechanis
ms Fit 
For 
Purpose 

√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Implement
ation 
Processes 
of External 
Quality 
Assurance 

X √ √ √ √ NR √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 



30/01/2023 

Independ
ence of 
Evaluatio
n 

√ X √ NR √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Decision 
& 
Reportin
g of 
External  
Quality 
Assuranc
e 
Outcome
s 

√ √ √ X √ PC √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Periodic 
Review of 
Institutio
ns and 
Program
mes 

√ √ √ √ √ NR √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Complain
ts and 
Appeals 

√ √ √ √ √ NR √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 



30/01/2023 

NR – Not Responded 

Check =  Comply / Available 

PC = Partially compliant  
X  =  Not Compliant / not compliant yet  

 



30/01/2023 

 
For Part B, all national agencies of the 6 RAFANAQ countries have commented on all the standards. Half of the countries fully aligned 
themselves with all the standards in Part B of the ASG-QA. For the other standards, the responses show that the one on complaints and 
appeals is not applied by a country for which the agency has only been operating for a few years.  One respondent has a lower than 
average rate of alignment due to the youth of the agency which is in the process of being operationalised. The independence of an 
agency is also rated as average. 
 
The findings on compliance with Methodologies (or Standards) used by commissions/councils for higher education to ensure internal 
quality assurance in line with the standards 1 to 7 of the ASG-QA, indicate that in general, all the five commissions/councils within the 
EAQAN that participated in the Mapping, comply with the reported alignment with Part A of the ASG-QA. 

Overall we can say that for Part B the countries covered by CNAQ have generally aligned themselves with all the seven standards stated 
in Part B. The countries are using different mechanisms, especially accreditation, assessment and audit to ensure that EQA mechanisms 
are fit for purpose with the stakeholders. Independence is marked by the possibility of the institutions to comment on the composition of 
the external evaluation panel and possible factual errors of the external evaluation report. Although there are mechanisms for periodic 
evaluation of institutions and programs, mechanisms for appeal and review are not fully developed and in place for all countries. 

 

 
 

Part C : Internal quality assurance for quality assurance agencies  
 
The results in Table 3 are a consolidation of the findings from the Mapping of the ASG-QA at the level of the QA Networks/Linguistic 
zones of the RAFANAQ, EAQAN and the CNAQ/Lusophone. They reflect the extent of Quality Assurance External Quality Assurance 
at the level of the Quality Assurance Agencies/Commissions/Councils for higher education.  

 
 

Table 3: Internal Quality Assurance of Quality Assurance Agencies/Commissions/Councils for Higher Education 



30/01/2023 

 
Référen

ces 
Buru
ndi 

Gui
née 

Mal
i 

Mar
oc 

Séné
gal 

RDC 
Ken
ya 

Rwan
da 

Tanza
nia 

Ugan
da 

S. 
Sud
an 

Ang
ola 

 

Ca
bo 
Ve
rde 

 

Mozambi
que 

 

Sou
th 

Afri
ca 

 

Legal 
Status 

  √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Vision 
and 
mission 

√   √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

 
Governan
ce and 
Managem
ent 

√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Independ
ence of 
QAA 

A 
renfor
cer 

√ A 
renfo
rcer 

A 
renfo
rcer 

X A 
renforcer 

√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 



30/01/2023 

Policies, 
Processe
s and 
Activities 

√   √ √ √ NR √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Internal 
Quality 
Assuranc
e 

  √   √ √ NR √ √ √ √ Part
ly 

√ √ √ √ 

Financial 
and 
Human 
Resource
s 

NR √ √ √ √ NR 

                   
  

√ √ √ √ PC PC PC PC PC 

Benchma
rking, 
Networki
ng and 
Collabora
tion 

√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 

Periodic 
Review of 
QAAs 

X √ √ √ √ NR √ √ √ √ PC X X √ X 



30/01/2023 

NR – Not Responded 

Check   -   Comply / Available 

PC - Partially complaint  
X   -    Not Compliant  
 
The different responses to Part C within RAFANAQ show that some references were not answered for some countries (e.g. human and 
financial resources, periodic evaluation, internal quality assurance and policies, activities and processes). Two respondents out of the 6 
fully aligned with all the benchmarks. All agencies are engaged in networking, collaboration and benchmarking. Despite the young age 
of most agencies, 4 out of 6 have undergone external evaluation. The critical point of attention noted among respondents is 
independence, which needs to be strengthened in 4 of the 6 agencies participating in the mapping project. 



30/01/2023 

 
The key findings on Internal Quality Assurance for the five commissions/councils for 
higher education- HEC-Rwanda, TCU- Tanzania, CUE- Kenya, and NCHE- Uganda and 
NCHE South Sudan indicate that 1) they have legal status such as University Acts and 
Parliament Acts), 2) the scope of their mandates include institutional accreditation and 
accreditation of programmes, 3) they have strategic plans, structured governance and 
management systems, 4)  the source of income is mainly from government, and there is 
existence of clear policies and procedures for financial and management decisions.  In 
general, the commissions/councils were regulated or audited by relevant public 
institutions and they are yet to adopt the practice of peer review. 

For Part C: Internal Quality Assurance for QAA in Southern Africa (CNAQ) 1) All countries 
reported that they have been established legally, 2) All the countries reported that quality 
assurance is their major activity and that there are systems in place to achieve the vision, 
mission and objectives of their QAAs, 3) All countries reported that they have well 
established governance structures and that they have qualified and experienced 
leadership to oversee the implementation of strategic objectives, 5) Most countries 
reported that even if they do not have financial independence because they depend on 
government funding, they are still independent to make accreditation decisions. 

In terms of periodic review of QAAs, three countries (South Africa, Angola and Carbo 
Verde) reported that that they have not been evaluated by an external agency as yet and 
they have plans for the future to do so. Mozambique (CNAQ) has been reviewed once by 
HAQAA1 in 2018 and the idea is to evaluated every five years. The next evaluation will 
be due in 2023. 

Presentation of CAMES results 
 

Part A: The references and guidelines in this part are aligned with those of CAMES. They 
are taken into account in the reference framework for the evaluation of higher education 
and research institutions. It should be noted that CAMES encourages countries to set up 
national agencies for external quality assurance in line with the local national context. 
 
Part B: The references and guidelines for quality assurance are generally in line with 
those developed by CAMES.  
 
Part C: It is noted that some references and guidelines are not yet fully implemented, 
such as the CAMES periodic evaluation. Indeed, CAMES has not undergone an external 
evaluation. 
 
CAMES has taken a new turn with the new director adopted on 10 June 2022 by the 
Council of Ministers of the 19 member countries. This policy has better clarified the roles 
and responsibilities of the institutional (university), national (agencies) and regional 
(CAMES) levels. 
 



30/01/2023 

 
 
 
 

Presentation of IUCEA results 
 

The overall alignment of the Regional Internal Quality Assurance standards and 
guidelines of HEIs in East Africa was assessed. The standards were compared with ASG-
QA.  A scale of 1 to 5 was used to estimate alignment of regional (IUCEA) standards to 
the ASG-QA- 1 as not at all and 5 as totally. The following sections present the summary 
of the findings.   
 

• Mission and Vision: The IUCEA has published vision and mission statements that 
reflect its commitment to continuous quality enhancement; strategic objectives and 
clear policies and procedures that are consistent with its vision and mission. The 
findings show that IUCEA has defined its own Vision, Mission and Strategic 
objectives in its strategic plan 2022- 2026 and published it on its website. 

• Human Resources and governance: IUCEA has policies on human resources that 
are inclusive, and that ensure recruitment and retention of adequate numbers of 
qualified and competent staff to achieve its mission and carry out its legal mandate. 
Also IUCEA as one of the nine EAC institutions has a policy on human resources 
that are inclusive, and that ensure recruitment and retention of adequate numbers 
of qualified and competent staff to achieve its mission and carry out its legal 
mandate. Governance and Management. Apart from that, IUCEA has clearly 
stated governance and management structures. That ensures sound and ethical 
governance and management, including robust QA practices that support the 
achievement of its mission and legal.  

• Financial Resource Management: It has been found that IUCEA has adequate 
financial resources and prudent financial management that are aligned to its 
mission, objectives and mandate to ensure quality education. However, findings 
show that the budget allocated to IUCEA is not enough to allow the Institution to 
fulfil its mandate to ensure quality education. 

• Infrastructure and Facilities: It is expected that regional agencies shall have 
adequate and appropriate infrastructure, facilities and resources to support 
teaching, learning and research. The findings show that IUCEA is planning to 
construct other offices in phase II to get appropriate infrastructure.  

• Research and Innovation: The findings prove that IUCEA encourage, promote, and 
engage in innovative research consistent with its policies and strategic plans, and 
address national, regional, continental, and international needs. The respondent 
proved that IUCEA encourage and promote research through several research 
project and by supporting students and staff mobility.  
 



30/01/2023 

Among 13 elements compared, only one scale has 3 and the remaining are in higher 
scale of 4 and 5. Aspects of governance, human resources, infrastructures, research and 
innovation, financial resource management are well addressed at IUCEA.  
 

Limitations of the results obtained 
The results suffer from methodological limitations even if, overall, the desired objective is 
achieved. Indeed, the information in the questionnaire was not always well understood. 
This is why the DRC did not respond to part A. Responses to parts B and C of the ASG-
QA were not easy because the agency had only one option despite the diversity of 
realities within an agency. As multiple choices were not available on the platform, the 
answers to the questions on References and Guidelines for External Quality Assurance 
(Part B) and Internal Quality Assurance for Quality Assurance Agencies (Part C) were not 
correctly answered in some cases.  
 
 

Methodology for the implementation of dissemination 
activities 
 
In addition to the appropriation of the ASG-QA by the actors who have directly worked on 
the mapping, namely the experts designated by the networks and regional quality 
assurance bodies, the heads of agencies and the focal points, the dissemination project  
methodology focused on the participation of the project coordination committee in the 
various annual events of the QA networks.  
 
Furthermore, various meetings organised or supported by HAQAA2 were used to present 
the project and generally raise awareness of the ASG-QA by presenting the three parts 
and providing background of the development of the tool which was endorsed by the 
African Union.  
 

 
Regarding the implementation of dissemination activities, important results have been 
achieved. 

 
List of dissemination activities at various stakeholder events/workshops/conferences 
that were organised by the RAFANAQ, EAQAN, CNAQ and HAQAA2:  

 
a). A Workshop on Quality Assurance Organised by the RAFANAQ in Partnership with 
the Francophone University Agency (AUF) held on 09-11/05/2022 in Bujumbura, 
Bujumbura. 



30/01/2023 

b). An Event on the re-launch of the African Credit Transfer System (ACTS) organized by 
HAQAA Coordination held on 07-09/06/2022 in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. 
c). The 11th East African Higher Education Quality Assurance Forum held on 20-
23/09/2022 in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania 
d). The African Quality Assurance Network (AfriQAN) Conference held on 25-27/10/2022 
in Maputo, Mozambique 
e). The Final Conference of the HAQAA2 held on 7-9/12/2022 in Accra, Ghana 

d). The Final Virtual Meeting on Mapping and Dissemination of the African Standards and 
Guidelines for Quality Assurance held on 15/12/2022. This meeting was attended by 
Stakeholders who participated in the Launch of the Mapping and Dissemination, the 
Filling of the Mapping Tool of the ASG-QA and participated in some of the Dissemination 
activities indicated above (a -e).  

The reports on dissemination activities at events/workshops/conferences organised by 
the RAFANAQ, EAQAN and CNAQ are provided in Annex.  

 

3. Analysis of the results of the mapping study and 
implementation of dissemination activities 

 
The results of the mapping study can be analysed from a number of angles: 
- The progress of the agencies surveyed in developing and implementing quality 
assurance: The agencies surveyed in the three networks are in different stages of 
development in terms of the implementation of the ASG-QA. Some countries are more 
advanced than others (some examples are Senegal, Guinea, Mozambique, South Africa, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda) and these are followed by Morocco, Mali, 
Burundi, Angola and Cape Verde. Some are still at the initial stages (for example DRC 
where the agency is not yet operational). This situation has justified the absence of 
response for some references and guidelines. It should also be noted that the DRC did 
not respond to part A. 
- The alignment of the ASG-QA benchmarks and guidelines with agency practices is 
observed globally for all countries, at least in the perception of those surveyed (Burundi, 
Guinea, Mali, Morocco, Senegal, Mozambique, South Africa, Angola, Cape Verde, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda). For the DRC, the level of development of the 
agency and the quality of the responses suggest that there is still work to be done. 
 
Critical points:  
-The reference to independence and its guidelines still poses problems either at the 
organisational, operational or decision-making level. In the dynamics, the references to 
the agencies' internal quality assurance processes and mechanisms and to periodic 
evaluation also need to be further implemented; 



30/01/2023 

- Quality assurance and evaluation of research and innovation are less developed by the 
agencies surveyed. 
- The quality assurance of distance education is also not yet sufficiently taken into account 
in the various reference systems developed by the countries. 
 
The analysis of trends in compliance with ASG-QA noted in the mapping exercise needs 
to be complemented by the agency reviews and consultancy visits conducted in several 
African countries under HAQAA1 and 2. In this way, a holistic use of the findings from the 
mapping, agency assessments and consultancy visits would provide a greater 
understanding of the dynamics and practices of internal institutional assurance, external 
evaluation and internal quality assurance of accreditation agencies in Africa. 

 
The analysis of the dissemination activities shows overall  

• The importance and usefulness of dissemination events to raise awareness of the 
ASG-QA; 

• A lack of information on ASG-QA among quality assurance practitioners; 
o the need to insist on the explanation of parts A, B and C before sharing the 

results of the mapping; 
• the need to continue dissemination activities to reach more targets; 
• the provision of materials in major African languages to facilitate dissemination; 
• the plurality of audiences affected by dissemination and capacity building, 

including officials in ministries, regional bodies, agencies, institutions and 
universities, technical and financial partners, practitioners, teachers, administrative 
staff, students, etc. 
 

4. Recommendations: 
 

The following recommendations emerged from the project and the analysis of the results 
of the survey and dissemination activity:  

- More detailed references and guidelines for distance education, research, 
innovation and resilience of higher education institutions. 

- Wider dissemination of the ASG-QA so that they are better known and used 
by countries and sub-regional higher education bodies; 

- Greater ownership by the agencies of the benchmarks and guidelines for 
independence, quality assurance mechanisms within the agencies and 
periodic evaluation. 

 
It would be appropriate for the HAQAA Initiative to include in its future work plan activities  
support the agencies in implementing the recommendations. This should include:  
 

• Promotion of the User’s Guide in order to facilitate the interpretation of the 
ASG-QA. 



30/01/2023 

• To continue with the capacity building activities at both agency and 
institutional level. 

• Take advantage of QA forums for practitioners to promote the ASG-QA; 
• Integrate the results of this dissemination project, the agency reviews and 

the consultancy visits into a more comprehensive analysis for a better 
understanding of the trends and dynamics of alignment to ASG-QA in 
African countries 

• Use this dissemination and capacity building experience for ASG-QA 
ownership as part of the implementation of the Pan-African Quality 
Assurance and Accreditation Agency (PAQAA); 

• Use the database of the various networks to facilitate the development of 
an African registry of quality assurance agencies in compliance with the 
ASG-QA. 

 
In addition, future HAQAA activities and general support for QA in Africa should:  

• Consider the importance of strengthening the newly created Lusophone Network 
for QA, which has been an off shoot for this project. 

• Develop detailed references and guidelines for distance education, doctoral 
research and innovation 

• The dissemination projects should continue under HAQAA3 so that the ASG-QA 
reach every corner where teaching and learning takes place. Quality can only be 
assured by those responsible for providing higher education.  

• For the ASG-QA to succeed, both external and internal stakeholders should be 
involved and be part of the process and their capacity in the area of quality 
assurance, both in higher education institutions and in QAA, needs to be 
strengthened. In parallel, HEIs should be challenged to come up with learning 
programmes that deal with quality assurance in order to improve institutional 
capacity in developing quality assurance units and running quality assurance 
agencies. 

It is strongly believe that these steps will facilitate the implantation of the ASG-QA 
within the African higher education space and establish a strong foundation for 
future development. 

 


	COVER Global Report ASG-QA Network Project VF_final.pdf
	Global Report ASG-QA Network Project VF_final.pdf
	1. Introduction
	2. Methodology
	Mapping methodology:
	Presentation of results
	Presentation of Global Results for the mapping
	Presentation of CAMES results
	Presentation of IUCEA results
	Limitations of the results obtained

	Methodology for the implementation of dissemination activities

	3. Analysis of the results of the mapping study and implementation of dissemination activities


