
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

Context
    Education  is  viewed  by  many
as  a  major  catalyst  for  individual  and
national  development.  This  is  based on
the  argument  that  the  process  of
schooling enhances people´s capacity to
improve  their  well-being  and  to  more
effectively participating in nation building
(UNICEF,  2005).  Education  offered
should  be  current  and  relevant  to  the
ever-changing people’s needs.

Raja  in  1991 identified  twelve
skills  that learners need to be equipped
with for them to easily adapt to emerging
challenges  and  opportunities  at  both
national and international arenas. These
included,  critical  thinking,  creativity,
collaboration,  capacity  to  communicate,
information literacy, technological literacy,
flexibility,  leadership,  social  skills
productivity and initiative. Countries have,
therefore,  taken  different  pathways  to
ensure the above skills are inculcated in
their  youth  through  the  schooling
process. 

Education  systems  are,
therefore, expected to evolve in tandem
with the dynamic needs and demands of
the  societies  which  they  serve  to  meet
the  aspirations  of  existing  economies
(Ojiambo  2009).   Education  plays  a
critical function in influencing sustainable
social  economic  development  of  any
society  in  the  world  (UNICEF,  2005).
This,  however,  depends  heavily  on  the
quality  and  relevance  of  the  education,
training and lifelong learning offered.

Education policy in Kenya, has
been  under  review  through  various
commissions  since  independence.
Nevertheless,  none  of  these  attempts
have provided a panacea to issues and
challenges facing the education system.
Sessional  Paper  Number  1  of  2005,
recommended a Sectoral Wide Approach
Planning,  focusing  on  access,  equity,
quality,  retention,  and  completion  rates
both at the primary and secondary level
of education (MOEST, 2005). Though the
approach is referred to as sectoral wide,
the policies focused more on two levels of
education  disregarding  early  childhood
and university-level.

From  these  commissions  and
sessional  papers,  two  system  of
education have been implemented and a
third one is on course. These are 7:4:2:3
system  that  was  implemented  for  21
years  and  8-4-4  system  that  was
implemented for  32 years. Currently the
competency-based  curriculum  (CBC)

2:6:3:3:3  has  been  introduced  to  replace
8:4:4 system. The new system emphasizes
more  on  competencies  acquired  as
opposed  to  the  previous  systems  that
focused more on knowledge acquisition.

The 7:4:2:3  system was phased
out on account that it was too academic and
therefore  not  appropriate  for  direct
employment,  and that it  encouraged elitist
and  individualistic  attitudes  among  school
leavers  which  was  seen  to  be  alien  to
African  communities.   The  8:4:4  system
was  therefore  adopted  to  seal  the  gaps
noted in 7:4:2:3 system. But the curriculum
soon  came  under  heavy  criticism  for
producing  learners  suited  only  for  white
collar jobs, that it  was too expensive, and
produced  lower  quality  graduates.  These
weaknesses are not any different from the
earlier weaknesses associated with the first
policy of 7:4:2:3. 

Despite the justification given for
phasing out the initial policy on the basis of
introducing  a  new  system  that  would
facilitate  production  of  required  skills
appropriate  for  the  economy,  programme
implementors  require  adequate
preparedness.  The objective  of  this  policy
brief is to establish how the new system of
education  (2:6:3:3:3)  should  be
implemented  differently  from  the  8:4:4
system with adequate preparedness of the
programme  implementors  for  them  to
actively participate.

Study Approach and 
Results

This  study  was  conducted  at  the
University  of  Nairobi.  The  researchers
applied  content  analysis  and  qualitative
approaches.   Interviews  were  conducted
with five academic staff members who were
at the University of Nairobi when the first lot
of 8:4:4 students reported to the university
in 1990. The University of Nairobi Calendar
1987/88,  University  of  Nairobi  Calendar
2005/2006 and Republic of Kenya, National
Education Sector strategic Plan 2018-2020
were reviewed.

The new system of education is said to
be competency-based and preparing school
leavers  for  an  active  role  in  economic
development. Though this is a very positive
endeavour it  is not likely to be achieved if
necessary  preparation  measures  and
infrastructure are not put in place and at all
levels of education. Change of attitude will
also  be  very  instrumental  for  any
meaningful outcome of the system. 

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Education and Training

System Approach and 
Implementation of the Education 
Programme in Kenya
Dr John M. Mwaura,  Dr Naomi W. Gikonyo and Prof John Kanjugu

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

77

For the fundamental changes 
introduced in the education 
system to achieve their desired
outcomes, the government 
through its various agencies 
needs to adopt a more 
inclusive and collaborative 
sectoral plan approach.

The Curriculum for teacher 
education needs to be revised 
to be in tandem with the new 
school system.

Teachers’ training in universities 
and colleges should focus on 
equipping teachers with the 
relevant skills, knowledge and 
right attitudes for successful 
implementation of the 
competence-based curriculum 

Learning and teaching resources 
should be incorporated in the 
sectoral-wide approach to 
educational plans for effective 
implementation of the new 
programme



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                  JULY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 2

When the first cohort of 8:4:4 system of
education  students  reported  to  the
universities,  not  much  preparation  had
been  done.  The  Academic  staff  and
administrative staff were not well orientated
on the intended changes. Kenya Institute of
Curriculum  Development  supported  this
assertion  based on the  review of  primary
and  secondary  curriculum  where  lack  of
capacity  among  curriculum  implementors
was  identified  as  a  major  hindrance  to
successful  implementation  of  the  8:4:4
curriculum.   The curriculum implemented,
therefore,  did  not  change  much  on  the
ground.  At  the  University  level  changes
were  basically  artificial  which  could  not
impact  much  on  the  Universities  output.
The structure of the University of  Nairobi,
for  instance,  remained the  same with  six
Colleges.  The structure and main areas of
coverage  by  the  departments  had  no
fundamental difference. (UON 1987/1988).

The  members  of  academic  and  non-
academic staff remained more or less the
same.  The answer to the access,  quality,
equity,  retention  and  completion  rates
challenges  identified  with  education
systems  in  Kenya  does  not  rest  on  the
magic  of  distribution  of  16  years  of
education  and  the  additional  one  year,
rather  it  lies  on  involvement  of
stakeholders.   Further change of attitudes
plays  an  important  role  in  change
management. 

Educational stakeholders who all value
and base their major decisions on grades
obtained as opposed to skills acquired and
problem-solving  capabilities  of  school
leavers need to be involved in change and
reforms management for the change to be
successful. Educators in Kenya have been
accused  of  referring  to  examination
outcomes  all  the  time  in  their  course
delivery  as  opposed  to  skills  and
competencies  acquired.  This  is  equally
reflected  in  the  recruitment  and  selection
processes  for  human  resource  for  both
private and private organizations. 

If a sectoral wide programme approach
is  not  applied  in  planning  and

implementation  of  educational  system
policy  mainly  at  primary  level  and
secondary  levels  leaving  out  early
childhood  education  and  university
education  then  the  outcomes  of  the
current  education  policy  will  remain
unchanged. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 There is a need for all universities to

establish committees to guide them in
aligning  their  academic  programmes
to the CBC.  

 Universities  should  actively  get
involved  in  more  focused  dialogue
with the Ministry of Education on CBC
education  reforms  for  enhanced
access, inclusivity, equity, quality and
relevance.

 There should be a task force formed
on  University  education  to  put  up
strategies more structurally. 

 Education  experts’  need  to  be
cognizant of the difference in outcome
of  the  education  system  that  they
expect  and such prepare  adequately
to  avoid  subjecting  students  from
different  education  system  to  the
same  learning  stimulus  and
environment  and  expect  different
outcome. The fundamental  difference
between  CBC  and  the  previous
systems of education implemented in
Kenya  since  it  attained  her
independence in 1963 should be well
articulated and provided for, in terms
of resources, training and support by
all stakeholders, if the effort is to bear
fruits.

 The Government of Kenya through the
Ministry of Education and other semi-
Autonomous  Government  Agencies
(SAGAs) that work under the Ministry

need to adapt  a more all-inclusive and
collaborative sectoral plan approach for
the  education  system  to  achieve  the
desired outcomes.

Acknowledgement
This  policy  brief  is  derived  from

research  findings  on  study  conducted  to
investigate the institutions’ preparedness to
implement competency based curriculum in
Kenya by Dr John Mwaura Mbugua of the
University of Nairobi.

References
Conference  proceedings  2019  August

16th  National  conference  on  curriculum
reforms (KICD). 

Kenya  Institute  of  Curriculum
Development  (KICD).  (2019).  Success  of
the  Implementation  of  the  Competency
Based Curriculum in Kenya. Nairobi, Kenya:
Government Printer.

Ojiambo,  R.  (2009).  Repositioning  the
Curricula for Effective Realization of SDG 4
for  Holistic  Development.  Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

University of  Nairobi  (1987).  University
on Nairobi Calendar 1987-1988, University
of Nairobi

University of  Nairobi  (2005).  University
on Nairobi Calendar 2005-2006, University
of Nairobi 

United  Nations  International  Children’s
Emergency  Fund  (UNICEF).  (2005).  The
Theory  and  Reality  of  Educational
Innovations  in  Developing  Countries.
Geneva: IBE-ENESCO.

Authors
Dr John Mwaura Mbugua 
john.mbugua@uonbi.ac.ke
Dr Naomi Wairimu Gikonyo 
nmwangi@uonbi.ac.ke
Prof John Kanjogu
jkkiumi@gmail.com
University of Nairobi, Kenya 

©2021 Authors
Published by Academia Kenya, https://academia-ke.org/journal/

78


