
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Images Source: Authors
Tunnel Solar Dryer

Context
The  horticultural  sector  befits

smallholder farmers due to low land and
labour requirements. In Kenya, mango is
one  of  the  major  fruits,  second  only  to
banana (HCDA, 2017). Kenya exports a
paltry  2%  and  less  than  10%  is
processed.  The  consistent  increase  in
mango production has been coupled with
an increase in postharvest losses (PHL)
estimated  at  40-50%  (KARI,  2004).
Concerted  efforts  and  commitments  to
reduce PHL exist. Under the Sustainable
Development Goal  12.3 and the African
Union’s  Malabo  Declaration  of  2014,
there  is  a  commitment  to  halve
postharvest losses from the 2015 levels
by the year 2030 and 2025, respectively.
Apart  from  increasing  food  reserves,
elimination  of  PHL in  fruits  alone could
raise  domestic  horticultural  revenue  by
17%, pitching the fruit sub-sector ahead
of  the  vegetable  and  floriculture  sub-
sectors  that  are  currently  the  highest
revenue  earners  in  the  horticultural
sector. 

Historically,  horticultural  research
has  focused  on  increasing  productivity.
However, given the inelasticity of scarce
resources, there is a consensus that the
focus should shift to PHL reduction. The
high  postharvest  losses  occur  due  to
poor  postharvest  handling,  lack  of
storage technologies, lack of processing
facilities,  and  poor  market  access.
Developing cold chains is critical in PHL

reduction  in  horticulture.  However,
conventional cold storage facilities required
for  proper  cold  chains  are expensive and
not  applicable  in  most  rural  areas  due to
lack of electricity. Most households (>80%)
in rural Kenya have no access to electricity
making it untenable and costly to invest in
cold storage facilities (GoK, 2008; Shitanda
et al., 2011). 

Consequently, the lack of cold storage
facilities  to  aggregate  the  perishable
produce  and  negotiate  for  better  prices
predisposes the smallholders to exploitation
by middlemen.  Globally, applicable off-grid
cold  storage  and  processing  technologies
exist.  However,  their  adoption in Kenya is
limited  due  to  a  lack  of  awareness  and
demonstrated  benefits.  It  is  against  this
background, that the University of Nairobi’s
postharvest  project,  with  support  from the
Rockefeller  Foundation’s  YieldWise
Initiative,  sought  to  upgrade  two  fruit
aggregation centres. Low-cost technologies
including  zero-energy  brick  coolers,
evaporative  charcoal  coolers,  and  tunnel
solar  dryers  were  provided  to  create
awareness and demonstrate their practical
application. However,  little is known about
their economic impact in Kenya, hence this
study.

Approach and Results
The  return  on  investment  (ROI)  for

the  PH technologies  was  estimated  using
Cost-Benefit  Analysis.  The  cost  of
implementation  of  the  technology  by

Series 1 – Agriculture and Livestock – Innovative, Commercially- oriented and Modern 
Agriculture and Livestock Sector

Investment in Technologies: Key 
Strategy for Postharvest Loss 
Reduction 
 Esther Mujuka, Prof Jane Ambuko, Prof John Mburu and Prof Ackello Ogutu

The government is supporting 
smallholder producers to 
form commodity associations
and producer business 
groups to facilitate 
production and marketing.

Smallholder farmers lack access
to requisite technologies to 
aggregate and process high-
quality products that meet 
the target markets' 
standards. 

Investment in postharvest 
technologies is viable when 
many adopted by farmers or 
farmer groups and discount 
rates are low 

There is a need to promote 
proven low-cost innovative 
postharvest technologies to 
ensure market access and 
reduce postharvest losses.

Key Messages

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

47



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

farmers  was  estimated  from  the  cost  of
experiments that were set up in the study
area.  Embu  County  was  purposively
selected  since  an  earlier  project
(YieldWise) had been implemented there to
ensure  proper  agronomic  practices  to
reduce  preharvest  losses.  Extension
activities  enhance  knowledge  of  the
technologies  among  the  farmers.  The
annual  cost  of  extension  was  also
estimated. 

The  economic  surplus  model  was
employed to estimate the potential benefits
of  investing  in  PH  technologies  to  both
producers  and consumers.  The economic
surplus  model  measures the  total  gain  in
economic welfare (change in total surplus)
and  is  a  function  of  the  gains  to  both
producers  and  consumers  due  to  the
expected  increase  in  supply  owing  to
technological advancement. The total gain
in  economic  welfare  is  a  function  of  the
elasticity  of  supply  and  demand,  yield,
price,  cost  of  current  postharvest
management  practices/interventions,
expected  yield  increases,  success  rate,
and  the  depreciation  rate.   The  relevant
data  were  collected  from  a  household
survey  in  Embu,  secondary  data,  and
expert  opinion  which  was  sought  from
researchers, scientists and extensionists.

Figure 1 - Mango fruits stored in a Charcoal
Cooler

Figure 2 - Mango fruits stored in zero-
energy brick cooler

Figure 3 - Mango fruits processed in a 
tunnel solar dryer

Results and Conclusions
Producers are willing to pay for

postharvest  technologies. Results
revealed that 81%, 56%, and 51% of the
farmers were willing to pay for  charcoal
coolers,  brick  coolers,  and  tunnel  solar
driers,  respectively.   Most  respondents
(80%) expressed a willingness to pay for
more affordable charcoal  coolers.  About
half  of  the  respondents  expressed
willingness to pay for brick coolers,  and
tunnel solar driers.

Investing in postharvest techno-
logies is  worthwhile.  The Net  Present
Value  (NPV)  of  the  research  was  US$
1.29  billion,  with  an  Internal  Rate  of
Return (IRR) of 28% and a Benefit-Cost
Ratio  (BCR)  of  4:1.  The  positive  NPV
implies that the proposed investment has
fairly attractive returns given the cautious
assumption  made  on  the  annual  1%
adoption rate  and a maximum adoption
rate of 10% in 10 years. The estimated
IRR  exceeded  the  market  rate  of  10%
implying  that  investing  in  the  PH
technologies has the potential of yielding
higher  returns  than  investing  the  same
capital on alternative investments. A BCR
of 4:1 means that the investor can expect
$4  in  benefits  for  every  $1  in  cost.
Producers are expected to gain from the
higher marketable produce resulting from
both the saved fruit and the existence of
advanced  postharvest  technologies  for
storage and processing. Consumers are
expected  to  gain  from  lower  produce
prices due to an increase in supply. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 There is a need for concerted efforts
to create awareness and promote low-
cost  cold  storage  and  small-scale
processing PH technologies.  Returns
to  investment  in  PH  technologies
highly  depend on adoption decisions
by the farmers. 

 The profitability of PH technologies is
higher  at  lower  interest  rates.  Thus
there  is  a  need  to  stabilize  interest
rates

 Short term price subsidies and/or tax
exemption on fabrication materials are
recommended  for  the  zero  energy
brick  coolers  and  tunnel  solar  driers
that are more efficient but  expensive
and which fewer farmers were willing
to pay for. 

Medium-Term
 Enhance  capacity  building  in

postharvest management at all levels
including  farmers,  traders,  extension
agents, agricultural training institutions

 Support  adaptive  research  and
innovation  in  locally  feasible  and

affordable  postharvest  management
options 

 Maintain the cost of capital at affordable
rates

 Develop  and  implement  policies  that
incentivize  postharvest  technology
adoption by various value  chain actors
including  farmers,  transporters  and
traders

 Promote the consumption and export of
dried  fruit  and  vegetable  products  to
create  demand  thereby  increasing
returns  on  investment  in  the
technologies 

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  derived  from  the
following  paper.  Mujuka,  E.,  Mburu,  J.,
Ogutu,  A.,  Ambuko,  J.  2019.  Returns  to
investment  in  postharvest  loss  reduction
technologies  among  mango  farmers  in
Embu  County,  Kenya.  Food  and  Energy
Security  9  (1).  https://doi.org/
10.1002/fes3.195. The authors would like to
acknowledge  and  appreciate  funding  for
this  research  from  the  Rockefeller
Foundation,  YieldWise  Initiative  (Grant
number: 2016 YWS 328).

References
Government  of  Kenya  (GoK),  (2008).

Economic Survey. Ministry of Planning and
Vision 2030, Nairobi, Kenya. 

Horticultural  Crop  Development
Authority  (HCDA).  2017.  Horticulture
Validated  Report,  Ministry  of  Agriculture,
Kenya.

Kenya  Agricultural  Research  Institute
(KARI).  2004.  Centre  Annual  Report.
Nairobi, Kenya

Shitanda, D., Oluoch, O. K., & Pascal,
A. M. (2011). Performance evaluation of a
medium-size charcoal cooler installed in the
field  for  the  temporary  storage  of
horticultural  produce.  Agricultural
Engineering International: CIGR Journal, 13
(1), 1596.

USAID-KAVES  (2014).  Mango  value
chain analysis. Nairobi, Kenya: USAID.

Authors
Esther Mujuka
esthermujuka@gmail.com
Department of Agricultural Economics
Prof Jane Ambuko
ambuko@yahoo.com
Department of Plant Science and Crop 
Protection
Prof John Mburu
john.mburu@yahoo.com
Prof Ackello Ogutu
chris.ackello@gmail.com
Department of Agricultural Economics
University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 29053 – 
00625, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

48


