
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Plate 1- Illegal/informal electricity 
connections 
(Photo: Lou Del Bello/Climate Change 
News)

Context
This  policy  brief  highlights  research
findings  from  a  two-year  project  using
Nairobi’s  Mathare  settlement  as  a  case
study.  The  research  established  that
close to 93 per cent of the residents have
access  to  electricity.  However,  50  per
cent  of  the  connections  are  informal  or
illegal,  meaning  that  they  are  not
provided directly by the mandated electric
power supply agency: the Kenya Power
and Lighting Company, and are thus not
metered.

A  key  feature  is  that  self-made
electricians  connect  households  to  the
grid at a minimal monthly charge of about
Ksh.  300  to  cover  for  repairs  and
maintenance. This indicates that there is
a demand for the services, but they are
not  affordable to the people,  and it  has
therefore  led  to  their  opting  for
alternatives  to  meet  their  needs.  These
illegal connections pose a danger to the
self-made  electricians  as  well  as  those
who  benefit  from  the  unregulated
electricity.  Moreover,  the  illegal
connections  are  also  a  risk  to  Kenya
Power’s  revenue  as  they  provide  an
avenue  for  households  in  the  informal
settlements to enjoy unmetered electricity
for which the utility provider cannot collect
revenue.

Due to the lack of a smart metering system,
Kenya Power cannot detect illegal taps into
their network.  Smart meters have worked
in  various  developed  countries.  Although
this  might  be  an  expensive  and  time-
consuming endeavour, it could be the long-
lasting  solution  Kenya needs  to  deal  with
the  challenge  of  illegal  connections.
Another  plausible solution is the reduction
of  the  electricity  cost  of  electricity  for
households in the informal settlement. 
This  policy  brief  holds  that  this  price
reduction  can  be  achieved  through
subsidies. The argument is that subsidizing
the costs associated with legal connection
to the grid will go a long way in reducing the
informal/illegal  connections  and  therefore
improve access to clean and safe energy
for the residents.

Approach and Results
The  research  informing  this  brief  was
carried out by research partners in Kenya,
Uganda  and  South  Africa  from  2017  to
2019,   who  set  out  to  better  understand
how sustainable energy solutions in urban
informal  settlements  can  be  achieved
through  collaborative  efforts  between
community  members,  experts  and  policy
actors.  The  research  partners  used
participatory  methods  to  facilitate  solution
co-design and knowledge co-production by
bringing  together  a  diverse  range  of
stakeholders  to  establish  viable  pro-poor

Key Messages

Series 3 – Political Pillar: Governance and the Rule of Law

A Case for Providing Electricity 
Subsidies In Urban Informal 
Settlements
 Dr Amollo Ambole, Peris Njoroge, Christer Anditi, Dr George O. Outa

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

21

Kenya lacks pro-poor 
electricity policies aimed 
at informal settlements 
leading to informal/illegal 
connections.

There is an urgent need for 
pro-poor energy policies 
to enhance access to 
safe energy for informal 
settlement households.

There is need for long-term 
collaborative partnerships
that build trust between 
the informal settlement 
dwellers, government, 
and service providers.



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

energy solutions that meet the objectives of
the  Kenya  Vision  2030  policy  blueprint,
while  also  ensuring  sustainable  energy
access  for  all  as  subsumed  under  the
global Sustainable Development Goal 7. 

In Kenya, researchers conducted a survey
of  100  households  in  four  villages  in
Mathare Valley informal settlement in 2017.
The  survey  provided  insights  into  the
energy situation in the settlement in relation
to  health  perceptions  and  other  socio-
economic factors.  Following this  exercise,
the team held a co-design workshop and
policy  seminar  that  brought  together
participants  from  Mathare  informal
settlement,  Nairobi  County  government,
Ministry  of  Energy,  Kenya  Power,  the
Energy and Petroleum Regulatory Authority
(EPRA),  University  of  Nairobi  and  other
research  agencies  such  as  Stockholm
Environment Institute (SEI) and IRD-Kenya.
From  the  research,  the  team  concluded
that Kenya’s energy policy and regulations
are highly standardized and might therefore
not work for the urban informal settlement
dwellers. For instance, despite the removal
of the standing charge and the reduction in
electricity cost under the ‘Lifeline Tariff’,  a
majority  of  Mathare  residents  still  cannot
afford  to  meet  the  cost  of  electricity
because  of  their  meagre  earnings,
averaging  of  Ksh.  18  thousand  per
household.  This  is  a  clear  indication  that
more  needs  to  be  done  to  ensure  that
informal  settlement  dwellers  also  enjoy
access to safe and reliable electricity.  

Some  initiatives  have  been  promoted  to
ease  the  burden  of  electricity  cost  for
households; however, they have done little
to  solve  the  electricity  problems  that
residents in informal settlements are facing.
The Global  Partnership  Output-Based Aid
(GPOBA)  Slum  Electrification  Program
supported by the World  Bank  and Kenya
Power and Lighting Company is one of the
significant initiatives that were rolled out to
solve  electrification  issues  of  informal
settlements.  However,  despite households
getting connected through this programme
the illegal  connections  have not  reduced.
The residents' claim that the switchboards
that were provided do not serve their needs

efficiently.  They,  therefore,  settle  for  the
illegal  connections  which  cater  to  their
multiple energy needs such as cooking,
heating, refrigeration and lighting.  

Key findings
 50  per  cent  of  the  electricity

connections  in  Mathare  are
informal/illegal

 Residents opt for  informal/illegal con-
nections because they  are  cheap at
Ksh.300 (US$3) per month.

 Residents  are  willing  to  get  legal
connections  but  only  if  the  cost  of
connection  and  power  bills  are
affordable.

 The  GPOBA  slum  electrification
project  has  done  little  to  solve  the
residents’  electricity  challenges.  The
radio boards are not sufficient to cater
for  the  household’s  multiple  needs,
i.e/,  heating,  refrigeration,  cooking,
and charging gadgets.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
Appropriate  electricity  subsidies  should
be put in place to:

 Phase-out informal/illegal connections
by  providing  incentives  in  terms  of
safety,  pricing and security  of  supply
to  encourage  residents  to  switch  to
legal connections,

 Enable  the  Energy  and  Petroleum
Regulatory  Authority  to  create  a
special  tariff  for  the  informal
settlement  dwellers  considering  their
low income. 

Medium-Term
 Invest  in understanding the needs of

consumers and build a relationship of
trust  particularly  between  informal
settlement dwellers, government, and
service providers.

 Design  centralised  solar  power  and
biogas  energy  stations  in  informal

settlements  that  can be used to  serve
communities at a cheaper cost.

 Invest  in  the  installation  of  a  smart
metering system to enable Kenya Power
to  detect  any  illegal  electricity
connections to the network.

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  informed  by  research
generated  by an  interdisciplinary  research  team
on  the  multi-country  research  project:  Co-
Designing Energy Communities, (in short CoDEC
(http://codec.livinglab.co.ke/).  CoDEC  research
was  carried  out  in  Kenya,  Uganda  and  South
Africa from 2017 to 2019 under the leadership of
Dr Amollo Ambole.  The CoDEC research project
was  supported  by  the  Leading  Integrated
Research for Agenda 2030 In Africa (LIRA2030)
programme.  The  programme  is  being
implemented by the International Science Council
(ISC), in partnership with the Network of African
Science Academies (NASAC), with support from
the  Swedish  International  Development
Cooperation  Agency  (Sida).  Additional  funding
support  came  from  the  Africa  Climate  Change
Leadership programme supported by IDRC.

References
Ambole, A., Musango, J.K., Buyana, K., Ogot,

M.,  Anditi,  C.,  Mwau,  B.,  Kovacic,  Z.,  Smit,  S.,
Lwasa,  S.,  Nsangi,  G.  and  Sseviiri,  H.,  2019.
Mediating  household  energy  transitions  through
co-design  in  urban  Kenya,  Uganda  and  South
Africa.  Energy  Research  &  Social  Science,  55,
pp.208-217.

Kovacic,  Z.,  Musango,  J.K.,  Ambole,  L.A.,
Buyana, K., Smit, S., Anditi, C., Mwau, B., Ogot,
M., Lwasa, S., Brent, A.C. and Nsangi, G., 2019.
Interrogating differences: A comparative analysis
of  Africa’s  informal  settlements.  World
Development, 122, pp.614-627

Author
Dr Amollo Ambole (lambole@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of the Arts and Design/ Institute of Climate 
Change and Adaptation, University of Nairobi, 
Kenya. 
Peris Njoroge (perisnjoroge764@gmail.com) 
Institute of Climate Change and Adaptation, 
University of Nairobi, Kenya.
Christer Anditi (christeranditi@gmail.com)
School of Public Leadership, Stellenbosch 
University, South Africa. 
Dr George Odera Outa (outa@uonbi.ac.ke)
Institute of Climate Change and Adaptation, 
University of Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

22


