
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Image: Mt. Kenya Forest (Magical Kenya)

Context
Deforestation  is  estimated  to  have
deprived Kenya’s  economy of  Kshs.  5.8
billion (US$68 million) in 2010 and Kshs.
6.6  billion  in  2009,  far  outstripping  the
roughly  Kshs.  1.3  billion  earned  from
forestry  and  logging  each  year  (UNEP,
2012).  Kenya has  a forest  cover  of  7.4
per  cent  of  its  land  area,  compared  to
around  12  per  cent  50  years  ago.  The
Kenya  Forestry  Working  Group  has
estimated  that  Kenya  will  lose  US$300
million  each year  through  deforestation.
Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation
(DFD)  results  in  loss  of  livelihoods  and
climate  change.  In  Kenya,  about  15
million  tons  of  carbon  dioxide  is  lost
annually  through  DFD  and  poor  forest
governance and management.
In Kenya, agriculture feeds both rural and
urban  populations.  The  forest
ecosystems  are  core  to  both  the
agricultural  and  food  system.  Forests
provide  various  ecosystem  services
which  include  water,  climate  regulation,
soil  erosion  control,  pest,  diseases  and
frost regulation, key ingredients to foods
security  of  the  47  million  Kenyans.
Between  2000  and  2010,  an  estimated
28,427 hectares of forest were lost in key
water  towers  leading  to  reduced  water
availability  and  increased  carbon
emissions. For instance, low volumes of
water and frequent drying of Mara River
occasioned by the destruction of the Mau

forest  complex  has  exacerbated  the
vulnerability  of  the  Mara  ecosystem.  The
degradation of the Mau forest complex has
a direct impact on the reduction the tourism,
an industry which contributes about 3.7 per
cent  of  GDP (2017).  Besides,  pastoralists
based in the Mara River Basin lost 35 per
cent of their livestock due to drought.
Forest  degradation  has  also  triggered the
scarcity  of  resources  and  resulted  in
conflicts  between  government  and
Community  Forest  Associations  (CFAs).
Recent  conflicts  have  been  witnessed  at
the Maasai Mau, Cheregani and Mt. Elgon
forests.  Further,  forest  destruction
precariously  exposes  women and girls  as
they walk long distances to fetch fuelwood.
About  82  per  cent  of  households  use
fuelwood for cooking and 1.2 per cent for
lighting (KIHBSP, 2017). However, Kenya is
only able to meet about 70 per cent of this
demand  through  sustainable  domestic
supply.   The  annual  deficit  of  12  million
cubic meters is met by formal and informal
imports plus unsustainable extraction from
natural  forests  (KIHBSP,  2017).  The
situation  can  be  reversed  through  forest
restoration and meaningful  involvement  of
the CFAs in forest co-management.

Approach and Results
The  Forest  Conservation  and

Management Act (2016) provides the basis
for a new perspective on forest ecosystems

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Replenish Millions of Kenyan 
Household’s Granaries Through Forest 
Restoration
Jane Mutune

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

41

Involve Community Forest 
Association (CFA) members 
in decision making over forest
resources.

Invest in capacity building of 
CFA members on leadership, 
accountability and 
transparency.

Invest in alternative nature-
based income-generating 
activities to ease financial 
constraints and enhance 
forest restoration.

Operationalize the CFA user 
groups to incentivize 
community participation in 
forest conservation.

 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

management for improved forest conditions
and livelihoods. Community participation in
forest  management  is  paramount  in
addressing  climate  change  challenges,
rehabilitation  and  restoration  of  forest
resources.  Participation  of  CFA members
needs  incentives  and  technical  support
mostly  from  the  Kenya  Forest  Service
(KFS)  and  external  programs.  Currently,
the CFA members are mostly involved by
KFS  in  providing  labour  in  forest-related
activities like shamba system, aftercare of
tree  seedlings  and  scouting  which  are
paramount for forest conservation but have
minimal  tangible  benefits  to  communities
and  without  a  clear  benefit-sharing
mechanism.

Usually, CFAs have lamented exclusion
by KFS from decision making over  forest
resources. Yet the involvement of CFAs in
decision making and gainful  nature-based
income-generating  activities,  for  example,
farm forestry,  beekeeping,  ecotourism are
useful  means  through  which  CFAs  can
increase their  livelihoods  while  enhancing
the  capacity  of  forest  ecosystems  to
produce goods and services. For instance,
meaningful  involvement  of  CFA members
can restore key water towers like the Mau
Forest  Complex  whose  total  economic
value  (TEV)  is  Kshs.  110  billion  (GoK,
2009). Its TEV can fund the 120 km of the
Nairobi-  Naivasha  SGR  line  whose  total
construction  cost  is  estimated  at  Sh153
billion. 

When  CFA  members  are  given
complete  autonomy  and  devolution  of
power,  CFAs  can  become  viable  local
institutions  for  sustaining  forests.  When
managed  sustainably  forests  have  the
potential  to  absorb  about  one-tenth  of
global  carbon  emissions.  If  we  halt
deforestation  and  forest  degradation  and
forest  restored  then  we  could  reduce
emissions by 9 gigatons of carbon dioxide
per year by 2030 (Miles and Sonwa, 2015)

Moreover,  the  widely  accepted
principles  of  good  governance  such  as
accountability, transparency and rule of law,
which  have  been  lacking  in  centralized

forest  management  regime  could  be
largely  present,  effective  and  having  a
strong influence on CFAs functioning for
sustainable  management  of  forest
resources.

Therefore, there is a need for stronger
efforts to ensure better functioning of the
CFAs.  That  is,  for  the CFAs to become
responsive in forest conservation, further
decentralization  of  decision  making and
autonomy are believed to be an important
step forward here as part of  the current
problems, especially lack of interest in the
CFAs,  relates  to  lack  of  real  decision-
making power. This may involve efforts to
ensure  capacity  building  of  CFAs
members  and  tangible  benefits  through
value addition on forest products.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 There  should  be  a  clear  benefit-

sharing mechanism between the KFS
and  CFAs,  giving  communities
incentives  to  participate  in  forest
management and enhance ownership
for sustainability

 There is need for capacity building on
leadership  and  good  governance
among CFAs. 

 The  Community  Forest  Association
Members should be actively involved
in  decision  making  related  to  forest
management and governance. 

Medium-Term
 The  community  forest  user  groups

should be operationalized.
 The KFS and CFAs should restore the

degraded forests and water towers, as
a pathway  to  reduce emissions from
deforestation and forest degradation.

 The  government  should  undertake  a
total  economic  valuation  of  water
towers which is currently not known.

Acknowledgements
Preparation  of  this  policy  brief  was
supported  by  the  AgriFose2030  program
and  the  International  Livestock  Research
Institute  with  financial  support  from  the
Swedish International Development Agency.
Special  thanks  to  the  Regional  Strategic
Analysis  and  Knowledge  Support  System
(ReSAKSS) team for imparting me with the
skills of translating policy into practice. 

References
GoK  (2016).  The  Kenya  Forest  and

Management  Act.  Government  Printer,
Nairobi, Kenya.

Kenya  National  Bureau  of  Statistics
(2016).  Kenya  Integrated  Household
Budget Survey 2016-2017. Nairobi Kenya.

Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  Of
The United  Nations (2010).  Global  Forest
Resources  Assessment  Country  Report
Kenya.

Mutune,  J.M.,  Wahome, R.G.,  Mungai,
Lund, J.F., and Hansen, C.P. (2016). What
Rights and Benefits? The Implementation of
Participatory Forest Management in Kenya:
The Case of Eastern Mau Forest Reserve.
Journal  of  Sustainable  Forestry, Vol.  36
(230–249).

UNEP and KFS (2012). The Role and
Contribution  of  Montane  Forests  and
Related Ecosystem Services to the Kenyan
Economy. KFS, Nairobi, Kenya.

UNEP  (2015).  The  Emissions  Gap
Report  2015. United  Nations  Environment
Programme (UNEP), Nairobi.

Authors
Jane Mutune  
(mutheumutune22@gmail.com)
Wangari Maathai Institute for Peace and 
Environmental Studies
University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100
Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

42


