
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Image: piixabay.com

Context
In  chronic  kidney  disease  (CKD),  the
kidney’s  functions  of  removal  of  waste
product  from  the  body  are  gradually
impaired,  causing the death of  over  2.4
million  people  globally  (International
Society  of  Nephrology,  2018).  The
existing therapy for CKD is either dialysis
or  kidney  transplant  alongside
modification  of  lifestyle  behaviours.
Successful  dialysis  therapy  for  patients
with  CKD  requires  adherence  to  diet
prescriptions  to  avoid  further
accumulation  of  waste  products  in  the
blood  and  development  of  infections
(Campbell  &  Rossi,  2014;  Rysz,
Franczyk,  Ciałkowska-Rysz,  &  Gluba-
Brzózka, 2017). 

Although  diet  is  one  of  the  most
modifiable  lifestyle  factors  in  the
management  of  patients  with  CKD,
adherence  to  dietary  prescriptions  is  a
challenge for  most  patients  (Herselman,
2008).  There  is  limited  accessible
documented  information,  particularly  in
Sub-Saharan Africa on CKD (Stanifer  et
al., 2014; Yang et al., 2020). Additionally,
the  reasons  why  patients  with  CKD  on
hemodialysis and their  family caregivers
fail to adhere to the diet prescriptions in
the  African  context  are  not  clearly
understood. 

In  our  study,  we  attempted  to
examine adherence to diet  prescriptions
among  adult  patients  with  CKD  on
hemodialysis at the national teaching and
referral hospitals in Kenya.

Approach and Results
This policy brief is based on data from a

cross-sectional  mixed-method  study  that
employed both qualitative and quantitative
data  collection  approaches  among  adult
patients  with  CKD  undergoing
haemodialysis  and their  family  caregivers.
The study  was  conducted at  renal  clinics
and  wards  in  Kenyatta  National  Hospital
and Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital in
Kenya.  The  research  findings  were
triangulated with key stakeholders  groups.
To our knowledge, this was the first study in
Kenya  on  adherence  to  diet  prescriptions
among  adult  patients  with  CKD  on
hemodialysis. 

About  64%  of  patients  with  CKD  on
hemodialysis  at  the  national  referral
hospitals in Kenya did not adhere to their
diet  prescriptions.  This  implied  that  three
out of every five adult patients with CKD on
hemodialysis  were  at  risk  of  disease
complications  and  death  due  to  non-
adherence  to  prescribed  diets.  For  the
patients  who  found  the  diet  prescriptions
unattainable, it was challenging for them to
implement the diets as prescribed (Adjusted
odds  ratio:  0.24,  95% confidence interval:
0.13  –  0.46,  P<0.001).  Additionally,  those
who  considered  the  diet  prescriptions  as
flexible  and  in  harmony  with  their  routine
feeding practices were almost three times
more likely to follow the diet  prescriptions
compared  to  those  who  considered  the
diets  to  be  restrictive  (Adjusted  odds
ratio:2.65,  95%  confidence  interval:1.11  -
6.30, P:0.028). 

Among  the  reported  problems  that
hindered the patients  and caregivers from
adhering  to  their  diet  prescriptions  in  this

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Health

Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease: 
How Can They Make Informed 
Nutritional Decisions?
Dr Rose O. Opiyo, Dr Anthony Were, Dr Esther Nabakwe, Alexander Mbogo, Prof. Joyce Olenja, 
Zipporah Bukania

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

39

The Ministry of Health and 
partners should develop 
national standard operating 
procedures and IEC materials 
in renal nutrition counselling
for harmonized messages. 

All patients with chronic kidney 
disease should get takeaway 
information leaflets with 
patient-specific simple 
nutrition messages to ensure 
the accuracy of nutrition 
information; 

All nutritionists and healthcare 
workers in renal units should 
participate in regular 
continuing nutrition 
education on most recent 
evidence-based nutrition 
information.

 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

study  was  the  mixed  and,  sometimes,
confusing nutrition information which led to
dietary intake based on inaccurate nutrition
information.  This  finding  suggests  that
patients  lack  harmonized  nutritional
guidance;  hence,  they  make  uninformed
decisions  concerning  their  dietary  intake.
This  contributes  to  the  consumption  of
unhealthy  foods  which  only  negate  the
effects  of  dialysis,  thereby  increasing  the
risk of  death of  these patients as well  as
undermining  the  efforts  of  the  healthcare
system in the management of patients with
CKD.

Current State of Nutrition 
Counselling for patients with 
CKD

In  Kenya,  nutrition  counselling  for
patients with CKD is currently guided by the
National  Clinical  Nutrition  and  Dietetics
Reference  Manual  (GoK,  2010),  and  in
some  facilities,  facility-based  clinical
nutrition manuals and protocols.  However,
some of the recommended diets are based
on international clinical nutrition guidelines.
The  patients  in  Kenya,  particularly  those
from  rural  or  resource-constrained  urban
households may, however, find food items
suggested in these guidelines unsuitable or
inaccessible.  Although  the  Ministry  of
Health  launched  the  updated  Kenya
National  Food  Composition  Tables
(FAO/GoK,  2018)  based  on  locally
available foods in 2019,  most  nutritionists
at health facility level have not been trained
on  the  use  of  this  resource  in  diet
prescriptions.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 The  Ministry  of  Health  (MOH)  and

partners  should  develop  a  national
standardized  nutrition  protocols  based
on kidney disease staging, the existing
and  emerging  co-morbidities,  type  of
replacement  therapies  for  paediatrics
and adults, as well  as locally available
foods and resources

 MOH and partners  should  support  the
development  of  national  standard
operating procedures and IEC materials
including take-away information leaflets
with  patient-specific  simple  renal
nutrition  messages  for  patients  with

CKD to ensure harmonized message
delivery  based  on  current  evidence-
based  clinical  nutrition  and
sustainability  of  individualized
nutritional care;  

 All nutritionists and dieticians in health
facilities  with  dialysis  services  and
renal  clinics  should  receive  a
specialized training package on renal
nutrition  and  participate  in  regular
continuing  nutrition  education  to
deliver  a  harmonized  package  of
quality nutrition care to renal patients.

Medium-Term
 The health facilities that have nutrition

protocols  should  ensure  that  these
documents  are  regularly  updated
based on the national clinical nutrition
guidelines, existing and emerging co-
morbidities as well as locally available
foods  and  resources.  The  facilities
without  such  protocols  should  make
efforts to develop them.

 Healthcare  workers  in  renal  units
should  ensure that  they  possess the
basic  knowledge  of  renal  diets  and
always  refer  the  patient  to  the
nutritionist/dietician  for  individualized
nutrition counselling.

 MOH  should  promote  renal  nutrition
research  and  establishment  of  renal
nutrition  research  grants  and  global
funding networks.

Acknowledgements
This  research  was  supported  by
Consortium  for  Advanced  Research
Training  in  Africa  (CARTA).  CARTA  is
jointly led by the African Population and
Health  Research  Center  and  the
University  of  the  Witwatersrand  and
funded by the Carnegie Corporation, New
York (Grant No: B 8606.R02), Sida (Grant
No:54100113),  the  DELTAS  Africa
Initiative  (Grant  No:107768/Z/15/Z)  and
Deutscher  Akademischer
Austauschdienst (DAAD). CARTA had no
role  in  the  study  design  or
implementation.

References
Campbell, Katrina L, & Rossi, Megan.

(2014).  Salt,  protein,  phosphate  and
sugar: nutrition trends in kidney disease.
Renal  Society  of  Australasia  Journal,
10(3), 141. 

FAO/GoK.  (2018).  Kenya  Food
Composition Tables. Nairobi: FAO

GoK.  (2010).  Kenya  National  Clinical
Nutrition  and  Dietetics  Reference  Manual
First  Edition  (1st  ed.):  The  Republic  of
Kenya, Ministry of Medical Services. 

Herselman,  M.  (2008).  Non-adherence
with dietary prescriptions in chronic kidney
disease.  South  African Journal  of  Clinical
Nutrition, 21(2), 13-14. 

International  Society  of  Nephrology,
(ISN). (2018).  A call  for  Action on Kidney
Disease  -  United  Nations  High-Level
Meeting on NCDs.

Rysz,  J.,  Franczyk,  B.,  Ciałkowska-
Rysz, A., & Gluba-Brzózka, A. (2017). The
Effect  of  Diet  on  the  Survival  of  Patients
with  Chronic  Kidney  Disease.  Nutrients,
9(5). 

Stanifer,  J.  W.,  Jing,  B.,  Tolan,  S.,
Helmke,  N.,  Mukerjee,  R.,  Naicker,  S.,  &
Patel,  U.  (2014).  The  epidemiology  of
chronic  kidney  disease  in  sub-Saharan
Africa:  a  systematic  review  and  meta-
analysis.  The  Lancet  Global  Health,  2(3),
e174-e181. 

Yang, C. W., Harris, D. C. H., Luyckx, V.
A., Nangaku, M., Hou, F. F., Garcia Garcia,
G.,  .  .  .  Tonelli,  M.  (2020).  Global  case
studies  for  chronic  kidney  disease/end-
stage  kidney  disease  care.  Kidney  Int.
Suppl. (2011), 10(1).

Authors
Dr Rose O. Opiyo 
(roseopiyo@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Public Health, 
Dr Anthony Were (drajowere@gmail.com)
Department of Internal Medicine,
East African Kidney Institute, 
University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 19676-00202, 
Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya
Dr Esther Nabakwe 
(nabakwe@cartafrica.org)
Department of Child Health and Paediatrics
School of Medicine
Moi University, Box 4606-30100, Eldoret, 
Kenya
Alexander Mbogo 
(mbogoalexander@gmail.com)
Nutrition Department,
Kenyatta National Hospital
P.O. Box 20723-00202, Nairobi
Prof. Joyce Olenja (jolenja@gmail.com)
School of Public Health
University of Nairobi, 
Kenyatta National Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya
Zipporah Bukania (zbukania@gmail.com)
Centre for Public Health Research- KEMRI
P.O Box 15529, 00100, Nairobi, Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

40


