
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Source: Author

Context
Statement of the Problem
Agricultural  extension  and  technology
transfer  services  play  a  vital  role  in
disseminating research knowledge, skills
and income-generating strategies among
the  farming  communities  in  Kenya.
However,  there  exists  a  disconnect
between the  amount  of  information  and
technologies  developed  in  research
centres  and  what  is  implemented  by
farmers.  Further,  improved  technologies
are not reaching farmers for utilization as
a  result  of  weak  linkages  between  the
government's  extension  providers,  that
are  charged  with  the  responsibility  of
ensuring  that  the  technologies  transfer,
and the farmers for utilization.

Moreover,  the  effectiveness  of  the
Government  of  Kenya  extension  sector
service  provision  has  greatly  declined
during the last  decade due to structural
adjustment  programmes  (SAPs)  and
liberalization  policies.  The sector  further
faces  constraints  such  as  reduced  and
aged  extension  staff,  low  funding  for
operations  and  maintenance  services,
leading  to  weak  information
dissemination networks.

Interventions
Documented  evidence  shows  that  there
exist improved technologies in the research
institutions on the minor crops in Kenya and
worldwide,  (ICRISAT 2006).  For  instance,
the  Kenya  Agricultural  Livestock  and
Livestock Research Organization (KALRO),
in  collaboration  with  International  Crops
Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
(ICRISAT),  have  developed  and  released
numerous  improved  sorghum  varieties
suitable  for  arid  and  semi-arid  regions  of
Kenya. Further exists a contract farming as
the  latest  intervention  for  stimulating
farmers' uptake and confidence in investing
and production of improved sorghum.

Improved  sorghum  varieties  present
great  potential  for  food  and  nutrition
security  as  well  as  improved  livelihood
among 750 rural  households  in  the  semi-
arid regions of Kenya (Sekoli and Morojele,
2016). According to Chimoita et al. (2017),
the  market  outlets  for  improved  sorghum
products  include  contract  market  by  East
Africa Brewery Limited agents (48%), local
markets  (42%),  farmers’  organizations
(5%),  and  others  (4%)  including  the
National Cereals and Produce Board.

The  improved  sorghum  production
avails  enormous  income  generation
avenues  and  nutritional  products  through
value addition and processing of  products
such as  porridge,  cookies,  sorghum-millet
ugali and beer, and other products including

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Agriculture and Livestock

Improved Sorghum Variety: A 
Forgotten Gold in the Kenya 
Drylands
 Dr Evans L. Chimoita

Improved sorghum adoption, 
production, commercial-
ization and utilization offer a 
golden opportunity for food 
security among drylands 
inhabitants.

Sorghum avails nutritional 
products through value 
addition and processing.

Contract farming can stimulate 
farmers’ uptake and increase
land acreage under-
investment and production of
improved sorghum.

 Devolved units and national the
government should invest in 
the sorghum value chain by 
strengthening the extension 
systems and inputs support 
services.

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

31



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

animal feeds, manure and bio-fuel (Kenya
Vision 2030, 2007; MoA, 2010).

Issues
Despite  numerous  benefits  accruing  from
improved sorghum products and enormous
research  efforts  done  in  the  past,  the
adoption,  production,  commercialization
and  utilization  of  sorghum  products  as
staple food remains low in Kenya. The low
uptake  of  improved  sorghum  varieties  is
attributed  to  limited  extension  services
provision  especially  on  availability  and
reliability of  quality  seeds,  market  outlets,
and limited policy documentation (Chimoita
et al. 2017). 

If  such  challenges  are  not  addressed,
then it will  not be possible to achieve the
government’s  food  and  nutrition  security
agenda that is among the big four agenda
for communities living in arid and semi-arid
areas.

Approach and Results
The study, conducted in arid Mbeere North
Sub-County,  Embu  County,  employed  a
descriptive  survey  design  suitable  for
describing  information,  data,  events,
perceptions and issues. Further, the study
purposively selected 51 out of 101 agents
from  national  and  county  government
Ministry  of  Agriculture  engaged  in  the
improved  sorghum  value  chain.  Data  on
the extension agent's gender, work station,
education  level,  experience,  telephone
technologies, demonstrations, ASK shows,
market outlets  and radio techniques were
collected  from  lead  farmers,  private  and
extension agents located in Njura, Kangai,
Njarange  and  Kiambungu  villages  within
Mbeere North Sub-County, Embu county.

The study results revealed that 65% of
improved  sorghum  farmers  were  literate
while  the  extension  agents  working  with
sorghum farmers had acquired over twelve
years  of  work  experience  disseminating
various  agricultural  technologies.  The
agents  disseminated  technologies  by
embracing farm visits, demonstrations, and
agricultural shows visits and through radio

technologies.  Further,  the  extension
agents  work  experience  greatly
influenced  the  uptake  of  improved
sorghum technologies by farmers. It was
concluded  that  agricultural  shows
complemented  agents’  efforts  in  linking
farmers  to contract  market  agents  such
as East Africa Brewery Limited (EABL).

EABL  contract  arrangement  was
recommended as a suitable intervention
for  stimulating  uptake  and  increasing
farmers’  confidence  in  investing  and
production  of  improved  sorghum.  For
instance,  farmers  contracted  by  EABL
have  demonstrated  exponential  trendy
yields  achievement  from  15  tonnes  in
2014 to 60 tonnes in 2018 (EAML, 2018)
with  a  kilogram price of  sorghum going
for KES 23 in 2014 and KES 37 KES in
2018.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Immediate  need  for  farmers’

sensitization  on  contract  farming,
through  training  on  the  modern
contract farming arrangements 

 Enhanced uptake and implementation
of improved sorghum technologies by
farmers can be achieved through farm
demonstrations,  mobile  phone  text
technologies  and  empowered
extension agents.

 Rapid  support  from  devolved  county
and  national  governments  through
capacity building sessions to farmers
and extension agents.

Medium-Term
 Devolved units have the opportunity to

enhance  the  rapid  promotion  of
improved  sorghum  production  by
encouraging  farmers  in  allocating
enough  land,  sensitizing  farmers  on
the  importance  of  modern  contract
farming  that  stimulates  rapid  uptake
and production of improved sorghum

technologies among farmers because of
guaranteed market outlet

 County governments should invest more
in strengthening their extension systems.

Acknowledgements
This  policy  brief  is  an  extract  from  my
(PhD).  I  must  appreciate  mentorship,
financial  support  and  training  by  the
AgriFoSe  2030  program  and  the
International  Livestock  Research  Institute
(ILRI)  on  policy  briefs  preparation.  Thank
you,  Dr  Paul  Guthiga,  Prof.  Cecilia
Onyango, for your valuable technical input
and editorial support.

References
ICRISAT  (2006).  International  Crops

Research  Institute  for  the  Semi-Arid
Tropics,  Eastern  and  Southern  Africa
Region,  2006-2005  Highlights, Nairobi,
Kenya, ICRISAT, 

Chimoita E.L, Onyango C.M & Kimenju
J.W. (2017).  Factors influencing uptake of
improved sorghum technologies. Journal of
Agricultural Research, 2, 3-56

Ministry  of  Agriculture  (2010).  The
Annual Report, Crop Development Division,
Mbeere Division, Embu County, Kenya.

Muui C. W, Muasya R. M & Kirubi D. T.
(2013).  Baseline  Survey  on  Factors
Affecting Sorghum Production and Use in
Eastern  Kenya, African  Scholarly  Science
Communication Trust, Nairobi Kenya

Kenya Vision 2030 (2007). The Kenyan
goals for the Economic, Social and Political
Pillars  growth,  Kenya’s  new  long-term
national  planning  strategy,  Government
Press, Nairobi.

Author
Dr Evans L. Chimoita 
(echimoita@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Agricultural Economics, 
College of Agriculture and Veterinary 
Sciences, 
University of Nairobi, P.O. Box 29053-0605, 
Nairobi, Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

32


