
Shadow Information Technology in the Advent of Open Educational 

Resources

Dr Siphamandla Mncube

UbuntuNet Connect 2023

Date: 26-27 October 2023



Presentation overview

• Introduction and background

• Shadow IT

• Open educational resources 

• Why this research? 

• Research context

• Theoretical underpinning 

• Research methodology 

• Findings

• Discussion and propositions 

• Conclusion and recommendation 



Introduction and background

• Since the arrival of open educational resources (OER) in the education

sphere, shadow information technology (shadow IT) has been partially

denied.

• Academicians and students subconsciously or consciously use shadow IT

when appropriating OER for teaching and learning.

• In higher education institutions, academics or students turn to rely on

digital technologies and ICT, because they want to improve the decision-

making process for tuition businesses

(Dincă, et al. 2019). 

• In the current era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), academic

institutions exemplify the circumstances supporting the growth of shadow

IT.

• Including extensive technological proficiency, financial independence, an

open learning environment, high levels of collaboration

(Gomez Orr, et al. 2022).



Shadow IT
• Shadow IT is defined as supplemental systems 

installed by users to the nominally supported 

systems provided by the organization (Lund-

Jensen, Azaria, Permien, Sawari & Bækgaard, 

2016). 

• Alternatively, shadow IT is the software or hardware 

present in a computer system or network that lies 

outside the typical review process of the responsible 

IT Department (Gomez Orr, et al. 2022). 

• Shadow IT has been associated with potential risks 

and vulnerabilities involved in unauthorized access, 

loss of data and services.



Open Educational resources 

• OER are teaching and learning resources 

that are copyright embodied and accessible 

in the digital platforms including the 

shadow. 

• These resources are considered as 

Internet-enabled; particularly because of 

the emergence of open courseware, OER 

and open educational practices (Mishra, 

2017). 

• OER can be appropriated in online learning 

through the use of technology, such as 

Internet access through the use of different 

devices. 

• In the current era, these resources are 

intensely used and different digital or virtual 

platforms for global collaboration. 



Why this research? 

• The OER phenomenon has been widely researched in different higher education 

contexts.

• However, studies on the appropriation of OER through shadow IT are less 

reported. 

• The emerging literature relates to shadow education (Lu, Tuo, Pan, Zhou, Zhang & 

Hu, 2023). 

• and shadow economy (Dincă, Dima &   Rozsa, 2019). 

• Therefore, there exists a gap in the knowledge field. 

The study sought to investigate the use of shadow IT in the emergence of OER in an 

e-learning institution. 



Research context

• Information System research is characteristically situated in a

particular context.

• It is necessary for researcher / authors, editors and reviewers

to help ensure that both the research context and scope of

validity are adequately communicated and understood

(Davison & Martinsons, 2016)



ODL   ODeL CODeL

Year 2001-2010 2011-2020 2021-202…

Identity ODL ODeL CODeL

Leadership Prof Barney Pityana
Prof Mandla 

Makhanya
Prof Puleng LenkaBula

Characteristics 

• Distance learning, 

• including in-

person 

instruction, 

• online media, 

discussion 

courses, 

• tutorials, and 

• other blended 

forms of 

instruction 

• Business model,

• E-learning  

• Fully online, 

• electronic 

technologies,

• digital 

resources,

• technology-

enhanced

• Focuses on removing 

barriers to accessing 

learning, 

• student-centeredness, 

supporting students,

• constructing learning

• Open and distance,

• flexible,

• technology-enhanced, 

• e-Learning practices, 



Theoretical underpinning 

• To engage more deeply in the research, the theoretical underpinning involved

Rogers’s (2003) innovation diffusion phases, such as: knowledge (awareness),

persuasion (interest and perceptions), decision (evaluation/benefit),

implementation (trial) and confirmation (adoption).

• Opting for such a framework helped to obtain the relevant results on shadow IT in

the appropriation of OER.

• The study considered this conceptual framework as a fundamental model when

acquiring knowledge of the appropriation of artifacts in the Information Science

domain.

• Additionally, this enabled the understanding of the processes of how humans

interact with, make sense of and appropriate the functions of an IT system in the

context of the social practices of an organisation (Rohde, Brödner, Stevens, Betz &

Wulf, 2017).



Research Methodology

• This study employed a constructivist research methodology and a qualitative

approach, with the case study (the CODeL institution) as the chosen research

design.

• The initial participants were chosen from a diverse institution with eight colleges,

18 schools and 70 departments, snowball sampling was used.

• The first step in reaching potential volunteers was to obtain ethical approval and

permission to conduct the research.

• A different ranks of academics (42) – consisting of Junior Lecturers (JL), Lecturers

(L), Senior Lecturers (SL), and Professors (P) participated in the semi-structured

interviews.

• The interviews lasted for 25–60 minutes.

• One of the ways for collecting data in this study was the document analysis.

• NVIVO for data management. After data being made anonymous, the transcripts

were coded in NVivo and analysed.

• After re-reading the interviews and the codes, NVIVO memos were created on

various topics by returning to the individual interviews and further analysing the

data.



Findings
• Knowledge and perceptions of OER

• Although academic participants were knowledgeable and held various opinions 

about OER, the minority of the participants were not entirely certain about OER 

artifacts, which clarified some people’s idea about adopting OER. 

• Not all academics were comfortable with the use of online resources, OER are 

Internet-based resources that generate course anxiety. 

• Some academics expressed concern that not all teaching resources downloaded 

from the Internet were reliable and subjected to peer review. 

• The lack of subject-specific OER was viewed as a challenge. 

• Academics recognize any electronic or online resource that is pertinent for 

educational purposes as an OER. 

• Several academics indicated that OER are educational resources that are 

accessible online and can be found in journal articles, digital textbooks, blogs, 

open sources, databases and library portals. 

• These resources are helpful in meeting the demands of teaching and learning. 

• The CODeL academia also hinted at OER being easily available online resources 

that may be accessed at any time and from any location. 



Findings conti…

Implementation of OER

• Academics participated in the development of OER and chose various OER

implementation strategies.

• Academics began with basic responsibilities by creating their own programmes

that may be used on smart devices that many students own.

• Mobile apps, podcasts and other platforms that made it simple to access OER

were some of the specially created platforms.

• The developed platforms or apps were recognized as being easily accessible via

smartphones, which was mentioned as a benefit, given how common smart device

ownership was among academics and students.

“



Findings conti…

Shadow IT for the adoption of OER

• In the adoption of OER, academics used a variety of technologies and apps, some 

of which were part of shadow IT. 

• OER were largely accepted by academics, rather than being developed. YouTube, 

other academic institution websites and Open Educational Resources Universitas 

(OER Universitas) were the most commonly adopted platforms. 

• The OER Foundation, an autonomous, non-profit organization that coordinates 

OERU, provides free online courses to students and academics all around the 

world (OER Universitas, nd). 

• Academics mentioned that the purpose of OERU is to increase access and reduce 

the cost of tertiary education for students around the globe – particularly those who 

do not qualify or who are excluded from enrolling at HEIs



Findings conti…

Shadow IT for dissemination of OER

• Shadow IT offers potential growth in the dissemination of OER. 

• Academia used both official IT and shadow IT. 

• The most used systems for the dissemination of OER are social media, interactive 

platforms, and cloud storage.



Institutional relevant policy 
Policy Descriptions 

ODeL Policy, 2020 “ODeL [institution] will make effective use of educational and 

social technologies in learning programmes in appropriate and 

innovative ways that improve the quality of teaching and 

learning” .

ICT Acceptable Use 

Policy, 2020

“ICT systems, including but not limited to computing equipment, 

software, operating systems, storage media and network 

accounts that provide access to electronic mail (e-mail) and the 

internet, are the property of UNISA. These systems are to be 

used for business purposes in servicing the interests of UNISA 

and of our clients and customers during normal operations” .

(ICT Policy, 2020 “Proprietary software licensed to UNISA shall not be installed on 

UNISA employees’ and third parties’ personal computers”

Unisa OER strategy, 2015 (The OER movement’s aspiration to open access strongly 

resonates with our open distance learning model where spatial, 

geographical, economic and demographic boundaries must be 

reduced to facilitate and increase access to higher education).



Discussion and propositions 

In the current digital era, end-users (academics) have an expanding number of IT

options and recent data suggest that these end-users are increasingly using shadow

IT in support of their tuition (Hall Jr, 2019).

Proposition: 

In the advent of OER, the users’ knowledge and perceptions are crucial in determining

the status of engagement and utilisation of shadow IT at a higher education

institutions



Discussion and propositions cont…

The actual implementation of OER takes place at a CODeL. Academics are innovative

during the development of OER.

OER can be considered as shadow education, which is a private extracurricular

activity outside of the traditional educational system, aiming at facilitating students'

success and providing access to superior educational materials (Lu, Tuo, Pan, Zhou,

Zhang & Hu, 2023).

In so doing, it requires academics to be ICT-skilled. As information technology

advances, it is necessary to identify and use the right technologies, so that

organizations may effectively compete in the market by utilizing accurate and real-time

efficiency (Taherdoost, 2023).

Proposition: 

The innovative users contribute to the advancement of OER when shadow IT is

appropriated and academics must not be limited to particular systems, instead, they

deserve better recognition and acknowledgment.



Discussion and propositions cont…
Shadow IT was found to be useful in the dissemination of OER, although this raised

the alarm in terms of a discrepancy between the ICT policy, tuition policy and the

emergence of OER.

Most cited ICT and tuition policies do not articulate OER-related issues thoroughly,

although there is an OER strategy that governs the adoption and development of

OER. The strategy and policies seem to hinder innovation in the advancement and

dissemination of OER.

Therefore, the study proposes that the revision and realignment of the institutional

policies. This was confirmed by Mncube and Mthethwa (2022), who point out that the

integration of dual virtual structure policies for education contributes to the elimination

of the recurring OER problems in academia.

Proposition: 
The institution requires to take cognisance of ICT and its usage policies and strategies

to accommodate shadow IT for adoption and development of OER to be aligned with

the institutional rules and regulations.



Conclusion and recommendation 

• Knowledge and positive perceptions are the indicators that academics are involved

in the utilisation of shadow IT than institutional IT when dealing with OER.

• The study established that, while developing, adopting and disseminating OER,

academics primarily rely on shadow IT.

• The major suggestion would be that institutions realign and revise their ICT and

tuition policies and their OER strategies to include shadow IT in support of the

ongoing growth and innovation of OER.

• The research results of the study indicated that there are numerous gaps in the

literature.

• This implies that future research may examine ICT, OER and tuition policies for all

26 public universities in South Africa, so as to learn about the current approaches

of incorporating shadow IT in the age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.






	Slide 1:  Shadow Information Technology in the Advent of Open Educational Resources
	Slide 2: Presentation overview
	Slide 3: Introduction and background
	Slide 4: Shadow IT
	Slide 5: Open Educational resources 
	Slide 6: Why this research? 
	Slide 7: Research context 
	Slide 8: ODL      ODeL     CODeL
	Slide 9: Theoretical underpinning 
	Slide 10: Research Methodology 
	Slide 11: Findings
	Slide 12: Findings conti…
	Slide 13: Findings conti…
	Slide 14: Findings conti…
	Slide 15: Institutional relevant policy 
	Slide 16: Discussion and propositions 
	Slide 17: Discussion and propositions cont…
	Slide 18: Discussion and propositions cont…
	Slide 19: Conclusion and recommendation 
	Slide 20
	Slide 21

