
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Context
The release of the World Development Report in
1990 brought in the proposal of social safety nets
as a way of  protecting the vulnerable groups as
well  as  helping  countries  achieve  sustainable
poverty  reduction (Grosh et  al, 2008).   By 2006,
thirteen  African  countries  had  signed  the
Livingstone Call for Action which gives a platform
for  adoption  of  social  protection  and  social
transfers  as  some  of  the  strategies  to  promote
growth  and  reduce  poverty  among  the  most
vulnerable  groups.  According  to  the  New
Partnership for  Africa's  Development (NEPAD),  it
is  recognized  that  to  achieve  a  reduction  in
hunger,  production-based  investments  should  be
complemented by targeted safety nets. 

In  Kenya,  several  social  safety  net
programmes have been initiated to support lives,
livelihoods  and to  enhance resilience to  shocks.
The existing social safety net programmes in the
Country  include  the  Hunger  Safety  Net
Programme,  Orphans  and  Vulnerable  Children
Cash  Transfer,  Older  Persons  Cash  Transfer
Programme, People living with Severe Disabilities
Cash Transfer  Programme,  and the Urban Food
Subsidy Cash Transfer Programme (NGEC, 2014).
These  are  per  Article  21  of  the  Constitution  of
Kenya  which  puts  forward  that  it  is  the
responsibility  of  the  State  to  ensure  that  the
economic  and  social  rights  of  citizens  are  met
(Constitution  of  Kenya,  2010).  Government
ownership  of  social  safety  net  initiatives  has
shown some hope for  the implementation of  the

programmes.  However,  the  sustainability  of  the
programmes  is  a  major  worry  due  to  their
dependence on donors funding and technical support
(Barrientos and Hume, 2009). Despite the approval of
the National Social Protection Policy in 2011, Kenya
has continued to record a high incidence of poverty
coupled with food insecurity and malnutrition,  made
worse by disasters and stresses (Ministry of State for
Planning and National Development, 2012).

The  purpose  of  this  study,  therefore,
focused on the current social safety nets in Turkana
County,  primarily  on  the  use  of  cash  transfer
programmes and its role in community resilience and
food security. Turkana County is among the semi-arid
lands  of  Kenya prone  to  drought  and  suffers  from
historical  marginalization,  struggling  with  weak
infrastructure as well as high rates of illiteracy (OPM
2011). The  County is among the four ASAL counties
where  the  Hunger  Safety  Net  Programme (HSNP)
was piloted as a viable solution to the eradication of
poverty, hunger and malnutrition in the longer term.

Approach and Results
This  study  explored  the  experiences  of

pastoralist households and the perceived impacts of
social safety net programmes in Turkana County on
their  food  security  and  diversification  to  non-
pastoralist-based  livelihoods.  The  Food  security
situation  was  analyzed  using  the  four  standard
measurements of food security: food availability, food
access,  food  utilization,  and  food  stability.  Major
assessment  tools  used  included  the  Food

Key Messages

Series F – Foundations : Ending Drought Emergencies – Planning for drought: An end to 
drought emergencies and food insecurity in Kenya.

Integrated Social Safety Nets: 
Building Community Resilience for 
Sustainable Food Security
 Mark Ekiru, Dr Angeline Mulwa and Prof Dorothy Ndunge Kyalo

Cash transferred under social 
safety net programmes 
should be structured to 
include training and 
capacity building

Social safety net programmes 
should be linked with 
other long-term 
development initiatives 

Social safety nets 
programmes should also 
consider bottom-up 
approaches in their 
design and management

Beneficiary involvement is 
crucial  for understanding 
poor and vulnerable 
household needs rather 
than implementing blue-
print programmes

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

61



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Consumption Score as well as the Dietary Diversity
Index.  

Households  in  Turkana  County  are
exposed  to  frequent  droughts  and  other  climate-
related  disasters  that  make  daily  life  hard  for
households  which  are  already  poor.  The  Kenya
National  Drought  Management  Authority  (NDMA,
2015) puts Turkana County Poverty index at 94.3%
affecting  481,442  people.  Pastoralism  is  the  main
source  of  livelihood  in  the  study  area,  which  is
usually vulnerable to the impacts of drought. With the
death  of  livestock  from  climate-related  disasters,
households have always relied on humanitarian aid.
The  area  is  located  in  the  remote  periphery  of
Kenyan border with Ethiopia and South Sudan and
has low Government investments. This has added to
create food security vulnerabilities in the area. 

Coping strategies employed by households
include relying on less preferred and less expensive
food,  borrowing  food  from  relatives  and  friends,
limiting portions at meals, restricting consumption by
adults to allow small children to eat,  and reducing
the number of meals eaten in a day. These coping
strategies  employed  by  households  have  always
been short-term. In most cases, households with no
alternative  sources  of  food  ended  up  in  hunger.
Despite  the  existence  of  several  social  safety  net
programmes in Turkana County, only 14.4% of  the
respondents  had  enrolled  in  social  safety  net
programmes.  The  main  social  safety  initiatives
included The Orphans and Vulnerable Children Cash
Transfer  Programme (CT-OVC),  the Older  Persons
Cash  Transfer  Programme  (OPCT),  and  People
living  with  Severe  Disabilities  Cash  Transfer
Programme  (PWSD).  Those  enrolled  in  these
programmes felt that the amount of money disbursed
was  not  sufficient  to  cater  for  all  the  household
needs.

The  study  area  experienced  frequent
failure of market systems due to frequent disasters
and  underdevelopment  of  infrastructure.  The  local
markets  were  not  fully  functional  and  remained
fragile  and  vulnerable  to  climate  and  economic
shocks. The cash transfers often created a spike in
prices  due  to  demand  outstripping  supply.  Other
challenges  included  lack  of  fairness  and
transparency  in  the  targeting  process,  physical
accessibility  challenges,  frequent  delays  in
disbursements  as  well  as  inclusion  and  exclusion
errors.  Regarding the link between social safety net
programmes  and  food  security,  there  was  a  weak
positive correlation between social  safety  nets and
performance  of  food  security  projects  in  Turkana
County. Social  safety nets explained only 17.6% of
the variation of performance of food security projects.
On  average  beneficiaries  received  Kshs.  4,900
(approximately $50) after every two months. Coupled

with  a  high  rate  of  inflation,  the  amount  seems
unsustainable  for  building  resilient  livelihoods.
Studies  have  shown  that  the  transfer  helped
households  to  purchase  consumable  goods  but
did  not  increase  the  ownership  of  productive
assets (Merttens et al. 2013).

With a weak positive correlation between
the amount of cash disbursed and performance of
food  security,  there  is  a  need  to  redesign  the
approach  for  the  cash  disbursed  such  that  it
serves  as  an  incentive  for  households  to  get
involved in other livelihoods to boost food security
and not merely for smoothening food consumption.
This  would  motivate  households  to  engage  in
viable  small-scale  businesses  to  promote  self-
reliance hence building their resilience to frequent
shocks  such  as  droughts,  floods  and  other
common hazards. 

This  should  be  augmented  by  skills
training  on  micro-enterprise  and  basic  financial
and  business  skills.  Prevalent  of  the  weak
distorted  market  in  the  study  area  hence  over-
reliance  on  humanitarian  food  aid.  The  study
proposed  investments  in  infrastructure  such  as
roads,  electricity,  water  and  modern  market
facilities  to  act  as  a  catalyst  for  food  market
development  through  growth  and  expansion  of
trade. 

Regular  market  assessments  to
determine the number of transfers is key to ensure
commodity  price stability  as well  as  improve the
livelihoods of  the local  people.  Timeliness of  the
transfers  needs  to  be  strengthened  and
beneficiary  targeting  must  be  open,  transparent
and inclusive as much as possible.   To promote
ownership  and  effective  grievance  management
system  the  study  recommends  bottom-up
community  based  participatory  planning
approaches. This will help in the understanding of
community  and  household  unique  challenges
throughout the project cycle.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Development  and  implementation  of  a

standard monitoring framework on the impact
of social safety nets in addressing poverty and
building community resilience, this will ensure
proper  readjustment  of  the  programmes  to
achieve the desired goal of the initiative.

 Development  and  implementation  of  a
structured  information  sharing  among  state

and non-state agencies implementing the social
safety  net  programmes, this will  aid in avoiding
duplication  hence  the  robustness  of  the
programmes in reaching more vulnerable groups
and  addressing  the  grievances  from  the
communities.

Medium to Long-Term
 Integration  of  the  social  safety  nets  with  other

long-term  development  initiatives  such  as
infrastructure and human resource development,
this will  help in addressing market inadequacies
especially  in  what  used  to  be  referred  to  as
marginalized counties in the northern frontier  of
Kenya.

 Regular  market  assessments  should  be
enhanced  for  determination  of  the  amount  of
transfers  to  ensure commodity  price stability  as
well  as  improve  the  livelihoods  of  the  local
people.

 Timeliness  of  the  transfers  needs  to  be
strengthened  and  beneficiary  targeting  to  be
open,  transparent  and  inclusive  as  much  as
possible. 

References
Grosh, M.,  Ninno,  C.,  and Ouerghi,  A.  (2008),'

For  Protection  and  Promotion.  The  Design  and
Implementation of Effective Safety Nets. Available at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMOR

National  Gender  and  Equality  Commission,
(2014).  Participation  of  Vulnerable  Populations  in
Their  Own  Programmes:  The  Cash  Transfers  in
Kenya.

Barrientos,  A.  and  Hulme,  D.  (2009).  “Social
Protection  for  the  Poor  and  Poorest  in  Developing
Countries: Reflections on a Quiet Revolution.” Oxford
Development Studies 37 (4): 439–456.

Ministry  of  State  for  Planning  and  National
Development (2012).  Kenya Social Protection Sector
Review.

OPM (Oxford Policy Management). 2011. “HSNP
Targeting E ectiveness Evaluation ff

Author
Prof Dorothy Ndunge Kyalo 
(dorothy.ndunge@uonbi.ac.ke)
Dr Angeline Mulwa
(asabina@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Open and Distance Learning, ODeL 
Campus, University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Ken

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

62


