
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Photo: Allan Nyima/Pixabay.com

Context
According to the most  recent  data from
government agencies and media reports
on the sexual  escapades and drug and
alcohol  abuse  by  Kenyan  youths,  it  is
evident  that  teenagers  are  faced  with
major  challenges  that  require  urgent
attention.  Failure  to  address  these
concerns  may  position  Kenya  in  an
irredeemable state with a lost generation.
According  to  the  World  Health
Organization  (WHO),  adolescents  are
young people aged between 10 and 19
years. As it was underscored during this
research this population is often forgotten
in development discussions where more
emphasis may be placed on children and
youth in general. 

Adolescents  comprise  24%  of
Kenya's population. This large population
has  implications  on the  country's  health
and development agenda and is likely to
place  increasing  demands  on  the
provision of services. There is little doubt
that  a  large population  of  healthy,  well-
educated  and  fully  empowered
adolescents is a valuable national  asset
and,  indeed,  one of  the key ingredients
for  the achievement of  the demographic
dividend. However, if we reflect upon the
situation in Kenya today, adolescents are
one  of  the  most  vulnerable  sub-
populations.  The  lack  of  monitoring,
learning and evaluation mechanisms for
programmes  aimed  at  benefiting  young
people  has  been  a  barrier  to  effective
implementation of interventions. 

Despite  advancements  for  adolescent
and youth sexual  and reproductive health
(SRH) programmes, the latest data indicate
a  persistent  high  need  for  services.  For
example, more than 25% of young women
are  married  by  18,  increasing  their
likelihood  of  having  children  at  an  early
age. Nearly 33% of young married women
have  an  unmet  need  for  family  planning,
meaning  they  wish  to  delay  childbearing,
but  are  not  using  any  method  of
contraception, and are at risk for having an
unintended pregnancy.

Good health and other physical, moral,
and intellectual development outcomes are
often  mutually  reinforcing.  For  example,
healthy  children  do  better  in  school.
Similarly,  having  more  years  of  schooling
provides  essential  information  and  skills
that are linked to more protective and less
risky  behaviours.  There  is  also  strong
evidence  that  peers  and  parents  are
influential  in  shaping  gender  norms  and
attitudes.  There  is  some  evidence  that
schools  and  teachers  also  shape  norms
and attitudes. Evidence on the influence of
the media is beginning to emerge.

This  study  focused  on  understanding
and  proposing  solutions  to  improved
implementation  of  health  promotion
projects targeting adolescents in Kenya.

Approach and Results
A mixed-mode  approach  was  used  to

investigate both quantitative and qualitative
aspects  of  the  performance  of  HIV
prevention  among adolescents  projects  in
Kisumu  County.   The  focus  was  on  the

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Health

Policy Implementation and Performance 
of HIV Prevention Projects
 Anthony Ndungu and Prof. Harriet Kidombo

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

35

Improving Health Systems to 
Meet Adolescents' Health 
Needs.

The government and stakeholders
to establish localised 
monitoring systems for 
compliance with existing 
policies.

There is a need to address gender 
equality in adolescents health 
programming.

 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

policy  implementation  process  from  both
the  project  implementation  and  the
stakeholders’ perspective to draw important
lessons for the on projects’ implementation.

A  sample  of  354  respondents  was
drawn  from  four  different  organizations
implementing  HIV  prevention  projects  in
Kisumu  County.  They  included  primary
beneficiaries  (adolescents  enrolled  in  the
projects),  project  managers/officers,  M&E
managers/officers,  policy  regulators  and
social protection officers from the children’s
department.  Questionnaires  were  utilized
as core instruments of data collection. Data
used  in  this  research  was  collected
between July 2018 and October 2018. 

Using  Pearson's  Product  Moment
Correlation,  the  study  found  a  strong
correlation  between  the  policy
implementation  process  and  the
performance of the HIV prevention projects,
with a correlation coefficient, r=0.541.  This
can  be  translated  as  the  policy
implementation  process  accounted  for
54.1% variance in the performance of the
sampled projects.   A unit  improvement  in
policy  implementation,  therefore,  translate
in a similar percentage improvement in the
performance of the project. .

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Projects  should  include  a  component

advocating  for  the  formulation  of  the
necessary  policies  through  the
involvement  of  key  stakeholders  who

will  also ensure that  the policies  are
implemented within  the  scope of  the
project.

 Projects should develop the necessary
monitoring tools to capture and track
policy  implementation,  for  example,
utilization  of  standard  curricula  for
training  and  standard  operating
procedures  in  the  provision  of
biomedical services. 

 Project  management  teams  should
introduce the necessary provisions to
provide  technical  assistance  to  the
field  teams.  It  was  noted  that  there
were major knowledge gaps.

Medium-Term
 The shortcomings of health systems in

Kenya  are  well  known,  and
adolescents,  in  particular,  would
benefit  from  their  improvement
through  strengthening  human
resource capacities in health facilities
and  strengthening  the  stewardship
oversight  function  of  county
governments.

 Monitoring  of  policy  implementation
should be devolved to ward level from
current  data  capture  at  the  county
level. The entry of data at the lowest
level will allow real-time data updates
during programme implementation.

 Facilitate  the  research  and
development agenda by documenting
the  effectiveness  of  current
approaches, testing new interventions
and  enhancing  understanding  of  the
risk and protective factors influencing
young people's behaviour. 

Acknowledgements
Our  sincere  appreciation  goes  to  all
organizations  involved  in  this  research
through whom respondents were availed for
the study. We would also like to thank all
participants  for  taking  the  time  to  answer
our questions.

References
Chandra, P. (2002)  Projects: Planning,

Analysis,  Financing,  Implementation  and
Review. 5th ed. New Delhi: Tata McGraw-
Hill Publishing Company. 

FOCUS  on  Young  Adults  (2001)
Advancing  Young  Adult  Reproductive
Health:  Actions  for  the  Next  Decade.
Washington, DC: FOCUS on Young Adults.

Hoddinott, J., and A. Quisumbing (2003)
"Investing in Children and Youth for Poverty
Reduction."  Unpublished  paper,
International  Food  Policy  Research
Institute, Washington, DC.

Blum,  R.,  and  K.  Mmari  (2004),  Risk
and Protective Factors Affecting Adolescent
Reproductive  Health  in  Developing
Countries.  An  Analysis  of  the  World's
Literature  1990–2004. Summary.  Geneva:
World Health Organization.

Authors
Anthony Ndungu 
(awndungu@uonbi.ac.ke)
Prof. Harriet Kidombo 
(hkidombo@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Open and Distance Learning
University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, 
Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

36


