
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

Plate 1: People and Livestock Sharing a 
water point in Laikipia County
(Photo: Author)

Context
In  the  last  30  years,  frequent  droughts
have occurred in Kenya resulting in food
insecurity,  scarce  pastures,  and  loss  of
livelihoods and human lives. Drought sets
a vicious cycle of socioeconomic impacts
beginning  with  crop  failure,  unemploy-
ment,  erosion  of  assets,  decrease  in
income  and  poor  nutrition  (UNISDR,
2012).  In  Kenya,  drought  adversely
affects  rain-fed  agriculture,  water
resources,  hydropower  generation,  and
ecosystems. The average drought  cycle
in Laikipia County has reduced from 5 to
3 years affecting both crop and livestock
production. In the county  between 1984
to  2014,  53  per  cent  of  the  period
received  below  normal  rainfall  while  40
per  cent  of  the  period  received  above-
normal  rainfall.  More  years,  therefore,
recorded below normal rainfall increasing
the  frequency  of  drought.  For  example,
the 2009 drought  impacted over  75 per
cent of the crops, while 77.7 per cent of
the  households  lost  their  livestock.
Pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihoods are
more vulnerable to the effects of drought
in arid and semi-arid parts of the county
due  to  over-reliance  on  rain-fed
agriculture  and  natural  pasture.
Occurrences of drought leave households
devastated  and  unable  to  cope  without
external support.  

There  are  county  and  national  level
efforts to mitigate the effects  of  drought
including  the  National  Agriculture  and
Livestock Extension Program, food relief,
generation and dissemination  of  climate
forecasts,  as  well  as  ministerial  and
institutional  intervention  programmes

such as Njaa Marufuku,  ASAL based and
rural  livelihoods  support  programme,
Laikipia  community  development
assistance,  among others.  Despite efforts,
effects of droughts on household livelihoods
in the county remain unclear. Identification
of livelihoods at risk during drought informs
the  relevant  stakeholders  on  the  priority
areas  in  resource  allocation  and  decision
making to minimize drought effects among
vulnerable  households.  Knowledge  of  the
major livelihoods affected by drought in the
county is important to various stakeholders
in  minimizing  its  effects.  Against  this
background,  this  study  sought  to  quantify
and  assess  the  effects  of  drought  on
livelihoods in Laikipia County.

Livelihoods Losses in 
Laikipia County 
The effects of drought are as a result of the
interplay  between  natural  events  and
response by society  (Wilhite et  al.,  2007).
Laikipia  County  experiences  food  short-
ages,  lack  of  pasture,  and  high  prices  of
goods  during  drought.  Food  shortages
result  from  reduced  crop  yields  (57  per
cent) or total crop failure (26 per cent). Also,
drought  reduces  forage  production  and
water supplies putting serious pressure on
the  livestock  industry  (UNDP,  2000),  and
making  animals  more  susceptible  to
diseases  (World  Bank,  2013).   Unavail-
ability of fodder coupled with competition for
pasture  and  water  between  domestic
animals  and  wildlife  make  livestock  more
vulnerable  to  drought  than  crops.  For
example, 75 per cent and 13 per cent of the
households  in  the  county  reported
experiencing few and total livestock losses,

Key Messages

Series F – Foundations : Ending Drough Emergencies

Drought Risks Livelihoods in 
Laikipia County
 Dr Amon Mwangi Karanja

Sustainable drought 
adaptation strategies 
such as planting of 
drought-resistant seeds, 
timely planting, and 
planting early maturing 
varieties should be 
adopted to increase crop 
production.

Structured livestock off-take 
and feed storage could 
sustain animal production
during drought.

Rainwater harvesting and 
drilling of new boreholes 
can improve water 
availability and access for
the agro-pastoralists in 
Laikipia County.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

23



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 1

respectively,  during  droughts  resulting  in
reduced household income.

Further,  droughts  present  long-lasting
environmental  challenges  in  the  county.
Drying  of  rivers  (78.9  per  cent),  lack  of
wood fuel (11.6 per cent) and increased fire
incidences (8.8 per cent) were reported as
main the aftermaths of droughts. Drying of
rivers  leads  to  increased  distances  for
people  and  animals  to  water  points,
creating  the  potential  for  human-human
and  human-wild-life  conflict.  (Plate  I).
Increased fire  incidence results  in  loss of
biodiversity  and  potentially  altering  the
ecosystem. 

How to Cope with Droughts 
in Laikipia: An Agro-
pastoralists’ Perspective.
There  are  various  drought  coping
mechanisms adopted by households in the
county  (see  Figure  1).  These  include
seasonal  migration  with  animals  and
engaging  in  business,  reduction  of  the
herd,  buying  of  fodder,  and  planting  of
drought-tolerant crops. The low adoption of
drought-tolerant crops in this arid and semi-
arid part of Kenya may be indicative of the
missing  link  on  the  dissemination  of
information on sustainable drought coping
mechanisms by extension officers working
in the area. Drought adaptation is critical in
protecting livelihoods and food security  in
many developing countries (FAO, 2008). 

Though  seasonal  migration  with  the
animals  is  the  most  preferred  drought
coping  strategy  among  pastoralists,  it  is
unsustainable  in  an  area  known  to  have
deep-rooted land conflicts,  especially  with
ranchers, farmers, horticulturalists, conser-
vation  area  wardens,  and  government
authorities. This leaves pastoralists with the
reduction  of  their  herd  as  a  sustainable
coping  mechanism,  before  the  onset  of
drought. For example, the weekly live-stock
markets in Rumuruti town (Plate 2) offer an
opportunity  for  the  pastoralists  to  reduce
their  herds  before  the  onset  of  drought
hence minimizing losses.

Figure 1: Preferred Drought Coping 
Mechanisms

The  same  survey  found  that  financial
health  (the  ability  to  cope  with  unex-
pected  financial  demands)  was
worsening. Much of the access to credit
is  fuelled  by  a  proliferation  of  lenders
using  mobile  phone  technology  to  give
quick  small  loans  with  terms  that  are
otherwise  unfair  to  the  wellbeing  of  the
borrower.  This  amounts  to  predatory
lending, a lending practice with unfair or
abusive loan terms on a borrower. It also
amounts  to  a  coercive  practice  that
convinces a borrower to take a loan that
they can do without.  In this research, we
focus  on  lending  systems  targeting  the
poor, to give policy recommendations for
a  healthy  and  resilient  credit  system  in
Kenya.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Increased  awareness  on  drought-

resistant crop varieties such as millet,
sorghum  and  dolichos  in  Laikipia  to
minimize crop losses during drought.
Credit  should  be  extended  all
households  to  enhance  businesses
opportunities as a coping mechanism
during drought

 Structured  livestock  off-take  when
droughts  are  predicted  to  minimize
livestock losses among pastoralist

Medium-Term
 Rainwater  harvesting  and  drilling  of

new  boreholes  can  improve  water

availability  and  access  for  the  agro-
pastoralists of Laikipia County.

Acknowledgements
This  brief  is  a  product  of  the  author’s  PhD
research  work,  Karanja,  A.  (2014)  Effects  of
drought on household livelihoods and adaptation
strategies  in  Laikipia  West  Sub-  County  for  the
period  1984-2014.  Unpublished  PhD,  Egerton
University.

Preparation of this policy brief was supported by
the  AgriFose2030  programme  and  the
International  Livestock  Research  Institute  (ILRI)
with  financial  support  from  the  Swedish
International Development Agency (SIDA). I wish
to  thank Charles  Recha  for  his  technical  inputs
during the preparation of this policy brief.

References
TUNISDR 2012. Disaster Reduction in Africa.

United Nations International Strategy for Disaster
Reduction  Regional  Office  for  Africa  (UNISDR
Africa).

Wilhite, D. A.,  Svoboda, M.,  and Hayes, M.
(2007).  Understanding  the  Complex  Impacts  of
Drought: A key to Enhancing Drought Mitigation
and  Preparedness.  Water  Resources
Management 21(5), 763–774.

UNDP  (2000).  Report  on  the  Status  of
Drought  Preparedness  and  Mitigation  in  Sub-
Saharan Africa. United Nations (Volume 1). New
York:  Office  of  Combat  Desertification  and
Drought,  United  Nations  Development
Programme (UNDP).

World Bank, (2013). Agricultural Sector Risk
Assessment  in  Niger:  Moving  from  Crisis
Response  to  Long-Term  Risk  Management.
Report Number: 74322-NE.

FAO (2008). Climate change adaptation and
mitigation:  challenges and opportunities for food
security.  High-level  conference  on  world  food
security:  The challenges of  climate change and
bioenergy, Conference proceedings Rome, 3 – 5
June 2008.

Author
Dr Amon Mwangi Karanja
(amon.karanja@egerton.ac.ke)
Department of Geography, Egerton University,  
Box 536, Egerton, Kenya.

Plate 2: Weekly Livestock Market in Rumuruti 
Town
(Photo: Authors)

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

24


