
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

Context
Tourism  in  Kenya  is  a  major

contributor to the economy accounting for
approximately  11%  of  GDP,  27%  to
foreign  exchange,  19.2%  of  export
earnings,  and  12%  of  total  wage
employment (GoK, 2019). Because of its
potentials, tourism has attracted massive
direct  government  and  foreign
investments  with  multiplier  effects  in
other  sectors  along  its  value  chain,
including  hospitality,  transport,  hotel,
accommodation,  and  auxiliary
businesses  (Ondicho,  2018,  KIPPRA,
2019). Kenya has earmarked tourism as
a key pillar for the achievement of Vision
2030  and  Sustainable  Development
Goals (SDGs).  In  2019,  tourism earned
Kenya  Ksh.163.6  billion  from  2.035
million  international  tourist  arrivals  and
was projected to grow by more than 10%
(KNBS, 2020). However, the outbreak of
COVID-19 and its  cascading impact  on
global travel has brought the industry to a
virtual standstill (Irandu, 2020).

COVID-19  is  a  novel  infectious
disease  that  has  rapidly  spread  across
the world since December 2019 when it
was first detected in Wuhan, China. The
WHO  has  declared  it  a  pandemic  and
Public Health Emergency of International
Concern (PHEIC), and as of August 16,
2020, there were 21,613, 699 confirmed
cases  and  768,958  fatalities  worldwide
(WHO,  2020).  Kenya  reported  its  first
case on 15th March 2020 on a traveller
from the USA. Despite limited testing, as
of August 16, 2020, infections had risen
to  28,848  and  deaths  to  472  (MoH,
2020).  Kenya has  imposed an array  of
prevention  measures,  including  a
lockdown,  ban  on  air  travel,  social
distancing,  hand  hygiene,  cessation  of
local  travel,  nationwide  curfew,  testing,
contact  tracing,  quarantines,  working
remotely, closure of learning institutions,
businesses, services, and public spaces.

Many tourists have cancelled their
trips to Kenya in response to global travel
restrictions  due  to  COVID-19.
Plummeting  demand  has  triggered  a
crisis  that  is  being  felt  throughout  the
entire  tourism  ecosystem.  Most  tourist
activities  and  businesses  have  been
closed  and  others  are  operating  at  a
lower level, resulting in massive revenue
and  job  losses.  Whilst  tourism  has
proven to be resilient to shocks, including
terrorism,  violence,  natural  disasters,
economic  recession,  and  pandemics,
none  of  the  disruptive  events  has  ever
had such a  phenomenal  impact  on  the
world’s  economy,  especially  the  tourism
economy as COVID-19 (UNWTO, 2020).

The  impact  of  COVID-19  will  most
likely last longer rendering the future bleak
and the road to recovery is uncertain, but
much  will  depend  on  appropriate  policy
stimulus to mitigate the effects of COVID-19
and kickstart  a  rebirth  of  Kenya's  tourism
industry.

Approach and Results
The  study  was  conducted  among

dairy goat  This  policy  brief  is  based on a
qualitative study conducted among Maasai
communities around Amboseli national park
in  Kajiado  County  of  Kenya.  The  study
assessed  the  contribution  of  tourism  to
poverty  alleviation  (cf.  Ondicho,  2016;
2018).  Field  data  is  complemented  with
current  information  from  secondary
sources,  including  journal  articles,  web
sites, UNWTO statistics, government data,
newspapers, and blogs.

Impact  on  Arrivals:  The  number  of
tourists has, since mid-March when the first
case of COVID-19 was reported in Kenya,
sharply  declined  due  to  restrictions  on
global  air  travel  to  reduce  COVID-19's
spread.  Anecdotal  forecasts  suggest  that
Kenya will record negative growth in visitor
arrivals  in  2020,  as  its  major  source
markets,  including USA, UK, India,  China,
Germany, France, and Italy are among the
most affected by COVID-19 and are still on
lockdown,  curtailing  tourists  from  those
countries  and  others  from  travelling  to
Kenya for holidays.

Impact  on  revenues:  The  drop  in
arrivals will have a negative effect in terms
of  declining  income  and  rising
unemployment in Kenya. Tourism generates
direct  revenues through taxes on incomes
from tourism businesses and employment,
departure taxes, and levies on tourists such
as  park  entry  fees  and  indirect  revenues
through taxes and duties  levied on goods
and  services  supplied  to  tourism,  and
multiplier  effects  on  the  industry’s  value
chain.  These  streams  of  revenue  have
nosedived because  tourists  are  no longer
coming  and  domestic  tourism  has  been
curtailed due to COVID-19.  Available data
suggests that as of July 2020, Kenya had
lost Ksh. 80 million in tourism receipts and
will  likely  lose  Ksh.  85  billion  in  2020,  if
COVID-19 is not contained.

Impact  on  employment:  The  rapid
growth of tourism in Kenya has generated a
host of employment opportunities. In 2019,
all  tourism  establishments  directly
employed  1.6  million  and  thousands  of
others  in  tourism's  supply  chain  of  goods
and  services.  However,  due  to  COVID-19
businesses  have  lost  60-80%  of  sales  in
tourism,  forcing  some  to  close  or  scale
down. As a result, thousands of employees

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Tourism

Impact of COVID-19 on Tourism in
Kenya: Strategies for Recovery 
 Tom G Ondicho

The global spread of the 
coronavirus (COVID-19) has 
had a devastating effect on 
Kenya’s tourism economy.

The crisis calls for policy 
responses,

comprehensive re- opening and 
recovery plans, and 
enforcement of all health 
protocols for safe travel.

The future of Kenya’s tourism 
looks bleak because of 
uncertainty on how long 
COVID-19 and its cascading 
impacts will last.

Key Messages

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

45



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                   JANUARY 2021
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 2    No. 1

in tourism have either been sacked or sent
home  on  half-pay/unpaid  leave  due  to
COVID-19. The World Travel and Tourism
Council (WTTC, 2020) projects that roughly
750,000  jobs  in  Kenya's  tourism  industry
might be lost in 2020 due to COVID-19.

Impact  on  attractions:  Kenya  is  a
land of contrast with a multiplicity of tourist
attractions including sand coastal beaches,
rich  biodiversity,  beautiful  scenery,
interesting  wildlife,  and  rich  socio-cultural
heritage  of  its  people.  However,  90%  of
tourists  come  to  Kenya  for  the  superb
opportunities for wildlife viewing. Revenue
from wildlife tourism is important in funding
biodiversity  conservation,  wildlife  security,
livelihood  programs,  and  employment  for
community  members.  Revenue  sharing
arrangements  between  KWS  and  local
communities  and  dividends  paid  to
landowners from tourism income garnered
in  community  conservancies  serve  as
important  incentives  for  sustainable
environmental  practice.  However,  with
wildlife  tourism  not  generating  any
revenues,  KWS  has  suspended  revenue
sharing,  conservancies are unable to pay
dividends, and local people have lost jobs
leading  to  economic  hardships.  This  is
likely to lead to increased wildlife poaching,
illegal  grazing,  unsustainable  land-use
patterns  including  charcoal  burning,  thus
reversing the gains made in conservation
over the past decades.

Impacts on hotel and accommodation
sector:  The  KTB  reports  that  hotel
accommodation  was  80%  fully  booked
before  the  outbreak  of  COVID-19.
However, the detection of the first cases in
the country and subsequent  imposition of
stringent  containment  measures  triggered
many  tourists  to  cancel  their  hotel
bookings,  forcing  many  hotel  and
accommodation  establishments  to  either
close or operate at lower levels. Hotels that
have  closed  include  the  InterContinental
Hotel, Norfolk Hotel, Weston Hotel, DusitD2
Hotel, Enashipai Resort Spa, Sopa Group
of  Lodges  (Amboseli  Sopa  Lodge,  Lake
Nakuru  Sopa  Lodge  and  Maasai  Mara
Sopa Lodge),  Ole Sereni,  White Rhino in
Nyeri, and Maiyani in Nanyuki and Serena
Chain  of  Hotels  (Mara  Serena  Lodge,
Amboseli  Serena  Safari  Lodge,  Lake
Elmentaita Serena Camps, Kilaguni Serena
Safari  Lodge,  and  Serena  Mountain
Lodge).  This  has  triggered  massive
financial  losses  and  over  90%  of  hotel
employees have either been laid off or put
on  furlough  closures  because  these
establishments  are  not  receiving  income
due to COVID-19. Hotels that have laid off
staff include Villa Rosa Kempinski, Mayfair,
Norfolk,  InterContinental,  and  Serena
Chain of hotels.

Impact  on  transport:  No  destination
can survive without airlines, railways, and
other means of transport to enable tourists
to  get  there.  The  suspension  of
international  air  travel,  forcing  many
tourists to cancel their flights, has pushed
airlines into severe financial  strain.  Irandu
(2020) reports that Kenya Airways will

handle  2.5  million  fewer
passengers  in  2020,  resulting  in  US$
0.54  million  revenue  loss,  risking  137,
965 jobs, and US$ 1.1 billion contribution
to the national economy. Kenya Airways
reports  that  it  is  losing  US$  8  million
monthly  and  as  a  result,  it  is
implementing  cost-cutting  strategies,
including firing 40% of its staff to reduce
losses.

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 

 The  government  needs  to  provide
guidelines  for  re-opening,  adapting,
and  accessing  tourist  markets;  work
with  tourism  operators  to  access
liquidity  supports;  apply  health  and
hygiene protocols for food safety, safe
travel,  and the safety of  staff,  clients
and public; and enforce measures to
prevent,  manage,  and  mitigate  the
spread of COVID-19.

 The  government  can  provide  tax
breaks  and  concessions  on
operational  licenses  to  all  tourism
establishments,  request  commercial
banks to freeze payment of loans and
interest  and,  make  access  to  credit
easier for all  investors in the tourism
industry and its value chain.

 The  government  can  consider  an
economic  support  package  to
compensate tourism operators for loss
of  revenues,  to  enable  them  to  pay
salaries,  and  retain  their  employees
during the entire COVID-19 period, to
enable  tourism-related  businesses  to
remain afloat.

 The government can list, feature and
promote  local  tourism  businesses
social media and website channels of
the  Ministry  of  Tourism  and  Wildlife,
Kenya Tourism Board, Kenya Wildlife
Services and departments that relate
to the  tourism industry  and its  value
chain.

Medium-Term
 The  government  needs  to  formulate

friendly  policies  to  support  tourism's
recovery,  prepare  comprehensive
tourism  recovery  plans,  rebuild
destinations,  promote  partnerships,
and  coordinated  collective
approaches,  encourage  innovation
and investment, and regularly monitor
progress.

 Tourism  operators  need  to  show
strong  creative,  innovation,  and
resilience  skills  by  formulating  new
business models  and entrepreneurial
ideas for  products  and sales to help
the  sector  mitigate  the  impact  of
COVID-19  and  to  rebuild  a
sustainable tourism industry.

 Restoring  traveller  confidence  and
stimulating demand with new safe and

clean labels for the sector and concerted
promotion campaigns

 including  discounted  tours  on  social
media,  online  and  other  channels  for
both international and domestic tourists.

 The government can waive all taxes and
other  statutory  payments  for  two
financial years (2020-2021) and provide
tax breaks to tourism establishments in
2020/2021  season  to  allow  them  to
rebound. 

Acknowledgements
This policy brief is an offshoot of a previous
study by Tom Ondicho in 2015 entitled: “The
contribution  of  Tourism  to  Poverty
Alleviation in Kenya”, which was funded by
the  Deans  Committee,  the  University  of
Nairobi in the 2014/2015 cycle

References
GoK  (2018)  Kenya  Tourism  Agenda

2018-2022. Nairobi: Ministry of Tourism and
wildlife

Irandu, E. M (2020). Impact of COVID-
19  on  Travel  and  tourism  in  Kenya.
https://uonresearch.org/blog/impact-of-
covid-19-on-travel-and-tourism-industry-in-
kenya/ accessed July 10, 2020).

KIPPRA  (2019).  Kenya  Economic
Report. Nairobi: KIPPRA

KNBS  (2020).  Economic  Survey.
Nairobi: Government Printer

MoH  (2020)  Kenya  Ministry  of  Health
COVID-19  updates.  https://www.health.
go.ke/ (accessed August 16, 2020).

Ondicho  TG  (2016)  Tourism  and  the
Maasai  of  Kenya  (Chapter  4).  In  S.
Wakana, S. Siraishi, & T. G. Ondicho (eds)
Re-finding  African  Local  Assets  and  City
Environments:  Governance,  Research and
Reflexivity.  Tokyo:  ILCAA and  JSPS.  Pp.
61- 75

Ondicho,  TG  (2018)  Indigenous
ecotourism  as  a  poverty  eradication
strategy: a case study of the Maasai people
in  the  Amboseli  region  of  Kenya.  African
Study Monographs, suppl. 87-109.

UNWTO  (2020).  COVID-19:  Putting
People First. Madrid: UNWTO

WHO  (2020)  Coronavirus  Disease
(COVID-19)  Situational  Report?
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/
novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports
accessed 16 August 2020).

WTTC,  (2020).  Kenya's  travel  and
tourism sector outgrows regional and global
average  in  2018  https://centrefor
aviation.com/news/wttc-  kenyas-travel-and-
tourism-sector-outgrows-  regional-and-
global-average-in-2018-  887054 (accessed
August 16 2020).

Authors
Tom Gesora Ondicho
tondicho@uonbi.ac.ke
Institute of Anthropology, Gender and 
African Studies
University of Nairobi
P. O Box 30197, 00100, Nairobi, Kenya

©2021 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

46


