
KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Dairy Goats

Context
Livestock  production  remains  a  critical
sector  in  the  agricultural  economy  of
developing  countries.  Among  the
livestock production systems,  dairy goat
production  has  increasingly  gained
popularity  as  a  significant  contributor  to
this  important  sector.  Innovation  and
adoption of new technologies such as the
promotion  of  dairy  goat  production,
improvement  of  indigenous  goats  for
better production are poised to make an
even  bigger  contribution.  This  is  in
particular to the Kenya Big Four Agenda
focused to eradicate extreme poverty and
hunger, promote gender equality, ensure
universal  health  care  for  citizens,
habitable  housing  as  well  as  tackling
climate change by 2030.

Dairy  goat  farming has  several  benefits
such  as  enhanced  nutrition  from  the
consumption of milk (Peacock, 2008), the
creation  of  jobs  through  provision  of
animal  health,  breeding,  and  improved
household  income  from  the  sales
(Peacock and Hastings, 2011), provision
of manure, and the vital role in cementing
social  relationships.  Chenyambuga  and
Lekule (2014) assert that social-economic
usefulness  of  dairy  goats  cannot  be
underestimated.  Therefore,  a  profound
concern on the sustainability of dairy goat
farming is critical. In Kenya, the common

dairy  goat  breeds  include  Saanen,
Toggenburg and Alpines, and their crosses
with  Saanen  breed  leading  in  the  milk
production. 

In  the  1990s  and  early  2000  goat  milk
consumption  accounted  for  a  small  but
growing  percentage  of  the  Kenyan  dairy
market. FAO (2011) estimates that over 70
per cent of the milk sold in Kenya originates
from  dairy  cows  with  only  0.02  per  cent
from  dairy  goats.  Unlike  dairy  cow  milk
where markets are organized, producers of
goat milk are left to look for local buyers. In
recent  years,  dairy  goat  farming in Kenya
has doubled following an increased interest
in  the  venture  by  many  farmers  in  the
country.  This  is  because consumers  have
come to prefer goats' milk to that of other
livestock  due to its  nutritious and easy to
digest qualities. According to statistics from
the  Ministry  of  Agriculture,  the  total  goat
population in the country was 15 million in
2018,  of  which  400  thousand  were  dairy
goats.  This was an increase from 13 million
of  which  about  200  thousand  were  dairy
goats  (Oyugi,  2019).  Dairy  goats
contributed  4.2  per  cent  of  the  total  milk
production  in  the  sector  in  2016  (KDB,
2016).  Unfortunately,  policy  and  the
legislative environment do not favour dairy
goat  production.  For  instance,  CAP  336
defines milk as “milk for a cow”, leaving all
the other milk producers out. It is essential
that goat  milk production is mainstreamed

Series 1 – Economic Pillar: Agriculture and Livestock

Dairy Goat Sector Enhancement 
Strategies for Sustainable Livestock 
Farming Communities
 Dr Reuben Kikwatha and Prof Dorothy Ndunge Kyalo

Institutional linkages and 
collaborations are key 
strategies for enhancing the 
sustainability of dairy goat 
projects

Continuous farmer capacity 
building and establishment 
of sustainable community 
structures are necessary.

Dairy goat production technology
requires special 
infrastructure within farming 
communities requiring the 
intervention of the 
government and 
development partners.

Enhanced value chain 
structures, effective market 
systems are drivers for 
improved farmer incomes 
and livelihoods.

Key Messages

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

27



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                    JANUARY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

and related projects adhere to sustainability
criteria

Approach and Results
The  study  was  conducted  among  dairy
goat  farming  projects  in  Tharaka  Nithi
County.

Social  Economic  implication  of  dairy
goat  projects.  Dairy  goat  projects  have
faced the problem of sustainability affecting
their  ability  to achieving both current  and
future  needs.  This  study  established  that
the key obstacles to sustainability include
the  high  cost  of  dairy  goats  project
management,  poor  market  linkages,
inadequate dairy goat husbandry skills and
knowledge,   infrastructural  challenges,
minimal  support  from  the  government  in
extension  services,  and  expensive  health
services from private service providers
However, dairy goats have a high potential
for improving the social-economic status of
livestock  farmers.  The  39.4  per  cent  of
dairy goat farmers have benefited from the
venture  and  confirm  its  potential  in
livelihood improvement. 

Dairy  Goat  project  Beneficiary  Target-
ing. The success of a project lies not in the
fact  that  it  is  necessarily  targeted,  but
rather  in  how  it  is  targeted.   This  study
found gaps in the way dairy goat projects
beneficiaries are targeted leading to project
failure. Key findings were:

Gender  composition  disparity:  56.9%  of
the  dairy  goat  farmers  were  men  and
43.1%  women.  Gender  was  not  a
consideration in dairy goat farming 

Age Disparity: 42.6% were above the age
of  50,  while  42%  were  between  40-49
years,  14.4% were  between 30-39 years.
Only 1.1% were below 30 years.

Beneficiary  needs: 48%  of  farmers  were
happy that their needs were addressed. 

Dairy  Goat  Farmer  Capacity. Sustain-
ability structures such as community-based
organizations  (CBOs),  cooperatives,  and
self-help  groups  are  key  to  sustainable
dairy goat projects. 

Skills  and  Knowledge: Dairy  goat’s  man-
agement  is  capital  intensive  compared to
keeping  the  local  goats  and  requires
special  skills,  knowledge,  and  technics
such  as  breeding,  husbandry,  man-
agement,  healthcare,  and  infrastructure
maintenance.  Only  37.7%  of  dairy  goat
farmers have such skills and knowledge. 

“Peer  to  peer  learning  and  exchange  was
employed as a faster and sustainable method of
information transfer but unfortunately only a few
remaining initial farmers who were trained by the
project officials have the necessary capacity; new
farmers do not have” - Farmer

Resource  Contribution:  Only  33%  of
farmers  could  contribute  financial
resources to their projects without external
support while 17% think dairy goat projects
cannot  succeed  without  the  support  from
the government and NGOs. 

Community  organization: The  majority  of
self-help groups formed to spearhead the

goat dairy farming projects disintegrated
leaving  only  47.7%  of  the  farmers
organized in strong self-help groups and
are  doing  better  than their  peers  not  in
groups.

Institutional  Linkages  and  Support.
Adequate  linkage  and  involvement  of
relevant key actors and institutions in the
projects  at  a  different  level  are  very
significant.  Gaps  were  identified  in
institutional linkage to support dairy goat
projects. 

Health  service  institutions: Dairy  goat
health services are available but at a high
cost.  There  was  a  slow  emergency
response  rate  coupled  with  practising
veterinary  quacks.   Only  16 per cent of
farmers  enjoyed  quality,  accessible  and
affordable services.  

Market  institutions: Markets  are
disintegrated and not within the reach of
the  majority.  They  rely  on  organized
markets away from the community. There
is also no specific market for dairy goats.
Only 22.3% of farmers had access to the
right market information. 

“All  the  milk  I  produce  is  sold  locally  for
domestic use and the price is to too low. When
I want to sell my goats, I have to be assisted by
the  chairman  of  the  dairy  goat  breeder’s
association as there is no ready market locally”
- Farmer

Linkage to Government institutions:  Only
5.3%  of  farmers  were  linked  to  the
government  and  other  institutions  for
market and informational support. 

Dairy  Goat  Farming  Infrastructure.
Good  Infrastructure  is  a  pre-condition
improvement  in  the  development  of  the
livestock  sector.  Key  informants  noted
gaps  in  the  project  design  in  that  the
initial dairy goat shelter designs were too
standardized  without  considering  the
capacity  of  the  farmers  to  maintain  the
same.

Shelter: 23.9% of  the  farmers  indicated
that the materials for the construction of
the  shelters  were  readily  available  but
diminishing  timber  products  were
becoming  expensive  every  day.  Use  of
locally  available  material,  that  is  simple
and a less expensive design would have
been a better approach.

“I used to have a very good, strong house for
my goats, but now I am not able to maintain the
house to the required standards due to the cost
involved, lack of material. Again I have to pay
someone to build it for me since I don’t have
the skills but I have no money so am waiting for
the  government  to  come  for  my  rescue”  -
Farmer

Only  9%  of  the  farmers  were  able  to
maintain  their  dairy  goat  shelter  to  the
required standards.  Communal breeding
infrastructures were not within reach of all
farmers.  Only  19.1%  could  access  and
use the breeding infrastructure.  
Markets: Markets  are  widespread
covering  long distances.  Only  28.2% of
the  farmers  were  able  to  access  dairy
goat markets with ease. 
Transport: Unlike local goats, dairy goats
cannot  be  walked  long  distances.
Transport  infrastructure  is  lacking.  As  a

result, only 3% of the farmers were able to
transport dairy goats correctly. 

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term 
 Allocate  affordable  financial  resources

for dairy goat projects.
 Enhance  disease  surveillance,  moni-

toring and management 
 Improve extension services and access

to information 
 Strengthen  community  self-help

structures for  peer support  and access
to resources 

 Build vibrant market systems and value
addition  technology  for  dairy  goat
products

Medium-Term
 Gender mainstream dairy goat projects 
 Support youth to venture into dairy goat

farming  projects  through  training  and
restocking strategies.

 Create  a  supportive  environment  for
partnerships  and  collaborations  to
promote dairy goat projects 

 Review  of  CAP  336,  mainstreaming
dairy goats and allocation of necessary
resources especially during drought.

 Adopt appropriate technology to support
key  dairy  goat’s  infrastructural
development 

Acknowledgements
This policy brief is based on a PhD Thesis
study done in 2018.  We acknowledge the
dairy  goat  farmers  for  participating  in  the
study, the County  Government of  Tharaka
Nithi, and the University of Nairobi.

References
Chenyambuga, S. and Lekule, F. (2014)

Breed  preference  and  breeding  practices
for  goats  in  agro-pastoral  communities  of
semi-arid and sub-humid areas in Tanzania.
Livestock Research for Rural Development,
26, 117.

Kenya Dairy Board, (2016)  Dairy Data
for Milk Production Report.

Peacock,  C.  and  Hastings,  T.  (2011)
Meru  dairy  goat  and  animal  healthcare
project,  International Journal of Agricultural
Sustainability, 9:1, 203-211.

Peacock,  C.,  (2008).  Dairy  goat
development  in  East  Africa:  A  replicable
model  for  Smallholders?  Small  Ruminant
Research, 77: 225–238.

Zablon  Oyugi,  Z.  (2019),  Facts  Sheet
on Saanen Dairy Goats Farming.

Authors
Dr Reuben Wambua Kikwatha 
(kikwathar@uonbi.ac.ke)
Prof Dorothy Ndunge Kyalo 
(dorothy.ndunge@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of Open and Distance Learning, 
ODeL Campus, University of Nairobi,
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya.

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

28


