
The implementation of a framework for 
utilizing open-source cloud services in tertiary 

academic institutions



About The Presenter
Eng. Mutandavari Mainford
A holder of an MTech degree in Computer Science from Jawarlal 
Nehru Technology University, Hyderabad, India, an MTech degree in 
Strategy and Innovation from Harare Institute of Technology and BSc 
(hons) degree in Computer Science from Midlands State University, 
MSU, Zimbabwe. He has more than 11 Years of experience in 
teaching, project supervision, exam setting and marking. He is 
presently an acting Cloud Computing and IT postgraduate studies 
coordinator in the School of Information Science and Technology, HIT 
Harare.



What Will Be Covered

✓Brief Intro

✓Potential Benefits

✓Key Activities in Tertiary Institutions

✓Word Cloud of Open-Source Cloud Services

✓ Literature Survey of Bespoke Frameworks

✓ Framework Design

✓Case Scenario

✓Conclusion



Introduction

✓As technology continues to shape the way we learn and teach, it is 
crucial for institutions to leverage cost-effective and scalable 
solutions to provide quality education to students. 

✓Open-source cloud services offer a promising alternative to 
traditional proprietary software, providing flexibility, customization 
and collaboration opportunities. 

✓ It is of paramount importance to explore the benefits of open-
source cloud services in tertiary education and propose a 
framework for their implementation.



Key Terms

✓ Open-Source – refers to software or technology that is freely 
available for anyone to use, modify and distribute. The source 
code is openly shared and can be modified and improved by a 
community of developers. 

✓ Cloud Services – refers to the delivery of computing resources 
including software, storage and processing capabilities over the 
internet. These are provided by third-party providers who 
maintain and manage the underlying infrastructure required to 
deliver these services.



Potential Benefits (1)

✓ Costs saving- typically free/low cost allowing institutions to save 
money on licences.

✓ Scalability –Cloud Services can easily scale up or down providing 
flexibility and agility.

✓ Accessibility –can be accessed anywhere where there is internet 
connectivity.



Potential Benefits (2)

✓ Customization –can be customized to meet specific needs, 
providing tailored solutions that meet unique requirements.

✓ Innovation  - constantly evolving and improving

✓ Collaboration – Encourage collaboration and knowledge sharing 
among educational institutions, enabling them to work together to 
solve common challenges and share best practices. 



Important Activities in Tertiary 
Institutions

These are some of the key tasks at tertiary institutions 

▪ Teaching and learning activities 

▪ Research and innovation activities 

▪ Community engagement and outreach activities 

▪ Student support services 

▪ Infrastructure development and maintenance 

▪ Collaborations and partnerships with other institutions and 

organizations 

▪ Library and information services 



Open-Source Cloud Services    
                                                                                                                             



Literature Survey

Framework Key Features 

TOGAF based on four architecture domains: 

Business, Data, Application, and Technology.

ITIL The ITIL agile methodology features focus on a distinct 

component of the IT service's lifecycle:

Service Strategy

Service Design

Service Transition

Service Operations

Continual Service Improvement (CSI)

Design Sprint build and test a prototype in just five days. You'll take a 

small team, clear the schedule for a week, and rapidly 

progress from problem to tested solution using a proven 

step-by-step checklist.



Framework Design (1)
Step 1:Preliminary Phase - Self Assessment
 
The first step for any educational institution is to self assessment of the activities 
they do. Different universities offer have different activities . This lays the 
foundation for the softwares to be added in their matrix.

Step 2: Architectural Roadmap

This requirements gathering step focuses on defining the design  vision and 
architectural roadmap, which aligns with the institutional operation strategy and 
goals.



Framework Design (2)
Step 3: Cloud Information Systems Architecture
 
This step deals with defining the cloud services  and their interactions with the 
institutitional activities.There should be a marriage between services on offer vs 
institutional activities. Loose coupling should be encouraged to handle unrelated 
but interlinked services. For instance, Use of ERPNext to handle adminisrative 
authentication of registered students to attend a Bigbluebutton offered class. 

Step 4: Refactoring and Migration planning

This step involves developing a roadmap for implementing the new designs 
defined in the previous phases. At this step, it is important to engage a Solution 
Architecture so as to refactor into new and improved designs. The Migration 
phase involves  the movement of refactored applications from proprietary service 
providers to open-source cloud services.



Framework Design (3)
Step 5:Implementation Governance & Change Management
 
Most organizations resist change and it is important to condition stakeholders for 
change. This step deals with user acceptance   and managing the changes to the 
architecture over time.

Implementation Governance include drafting and implementation of usage 
policies,training strategies and getting feedback from stakeholders(mostly the 
students and the lecturers)



Implementation Matrix
Step 1:

Self 

Assessment 

(5%)

Step 2:

Architectural 
Roadmap

(15%)

Step 3:

Cloud Information 

System 

Architecture

(25%)

Step 5:

Implementation 

Governance & 

Change 

Management

(15%)

Step 4:

Refactoring and 

Migration Plan

(40%)

Framework 

Implementation



Case Scenario
A small university has about 1000 students and 50 faculty members. The 
university’s limitation is that they have limited IT infrastructure to conduct 
practical classes. Another challenge they face is  difficulties in managing its 
administrative tasks The university decides to implement open source cloud 
services to address these challenges.

Solution 
The university can use the OpenStack cloud platform to manage its administrative 
tasks. The university must define the scope of the architecture, identify 
stakeholders, and create a high-level architecture vision for the open source cloud 
infrastructure. Openstack can create a centralized database for storing student 
and faculty information, an email server for communication, a document 
management system for managing files, and a Moodle server to centrally manage 
online classes.



Conclusion

Implementing a framework for open source cloud services can provide numerous 
benefits, such as cost-effectiveness, scalability, and customizability.

However, it also comes with challenges, such as complexity and security risks.

To ensure a successful implementation, it's important to choose the right 
platform, plan your deployment, train your staff, monitor performance, and 
engage with the open source community. 

By following best practices and regularly reviewing and updating the 
implementation framework, universities can maximize the benefits of open 
source cloud services and reduce their expenditure on ICTs.

Edit Text Edit Text



References
⚫ The Open Group. (2018). TOGAF® 9.2 Standard. https://www.opengroup.org/togaf

⚫ AXELOS Limited. (2019). ITIL 4 Foundation: ITIL 4 Edition. https://www.axelos.com/store/book/itil-4-
foundation-itil-4-edition

⚫ I. Voras et al., "Evaluating open-source cloud computing solutions," 2011 Proceedings of the 34th 
International Convention MIPRO, Opatija, Croatia, 2011, pp. 209-214.

⚫ S. Ismaeel, A. Miri, D. Chourishi and S. M. Reza Dibaj, "Open Source Cloud Management Platforms: A 
Review," 2015 IEEE 2nd International Conference on Cyber Security and Cloud Computing, New 
York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 470-475, doi: 10.1109/CSCloud.2015.84.

⚫ T. D. Cordeiro et al., "Open Source Cloud Computing Platforms," 2010 Ninth International 
Conference on Grid and Cloud Computing, Nanjing, China, 2010, pp. 366-371, doi: 
10.1109/GCC.2010.77.

Edit Text Edit Text

https://www.opengroup.org/togaf
https://www.axelos.com/store/book/itil-4-foundation-itil-4-edition
https://www.axelos.com/store/book/itil-4-foundation-itil-4-edition

	Slide 1
	Slide 2
	Slide 3
	Slide 4
	Slide 5
	Slide 6
	Slide 7
	Slide 8
	Slide 9
	Slide 10
	Slide 11
	Slide 12
	Slide 13
	Slide 14
	Slide 15
	Slide 16
	Slide 17

