
Key Messages

KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

Image: Authors

Context
Rapid and haphazard urban development
has  often  placed  homes  dangerously
close  together.   When  fires  start,  they
often spread easily and quickly. Given the
density  of  many  of  these  settlements,
evacuations are chaotic and dangerous.
Pathways  between  homes  are  narrow
and  often  blocked,  and first  responders
are often unable to access homes in time
(Ngau, 2018).

It  is  estimated  that  over  65%  of
Nairobi’s  population  reside  in  the  over
180  informal  settlements  which  are
characterized  by  poverty,  substandard
housing,  extreme crowding,  and lack  of
basic services such as sanitation, water,
lighting  (Twigg  et  al.,  2000).  Nairobi’s
informal settlements experience frequent
fire  outbreaks  leading  to  loss  of  life,
serious  injury,  and  loss  of  assets  and
livelihoods  (DREF,  2011).  The
combination  of  poverty,  marginality,
overcrowding  and  limited  service
provision  exposes  residents  of  informal
settlements  to  a wide range of  hazards
particularly fires and disease outbreak. 

Available  literature  that  primarily
comes  from  accounts  of  non-
governmental  organizations  and
volunteer  emergency/humanitarian  relief
agencies  as  well  as  case  studies  of
research conducted in universities covers
three  broad  areas  of  interest:  fire
incidences with a focus on occurrences,
risk and vulnerability of the communities
in  the  informal  settlements;  fire
management  with  a  focus  on  policy,
infrastructure and equipment  in place to
combat fire outbreaks; and fire response
which mainly examine the nature of  the

response  by  the  communities  and  others
towards fire outbreaks (Ngau, 2018).

About the Study
The study aimed to examine the dynamics
of fire disaster, vulnerability and response in
the informal settlements in Nairobi using a
case  study  of  Mukuru  Fuata  Nyayo,  a
constellation of informal settlements lying in
the  southern  side  of  the  city.   In  Kenya,
there  is  no  systematic  record  by
government and city authorities on fires in
informal  settlements.  There  are  often
sporadic  and  conflicting  reports  on  fire
occurrence  by  diverse  organizations  and
agencies,  including  the  Kenya Red Cross
Society (KRCS), the United Nations Office
of the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(UN-OCHA)  and  the  Kenya  National
Disaster Operations Centre (NDOC). 

For  example,  for  the  period  between
January and March 2011,  KRCS reported
that  approximately  42  fire  incidences
occurred  resulting  in  at  least  11  fatalities
and  about  472  casualties  in  Nairobi’s
informal settlements (KRCS, 2015). For the
same  period,  UN-OCHA reported  that  71
fires occurred in Nairobi resulting in loss of
2,016  jobs,  376  houses,  2  deaths,  11
casualties  and  asset  loss  above  US$  1
million (UN-OCHA, 2011). 

Response to Fire in the 
Informal Settlements by 
Communities
There  are  two  aspects  of  community  fire
disaster response in informal settlements –
during  and  after  the  occurrence  of  the

Series 2 – Social Pillar: Environment, Water, Sanitation and Regional Development

Key Fire Disaster Prevention Factors in 
Informal Settlements in Nairobi
 Dr Samuel Mwituria Maina and Prof. Peter M. Ngau

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

37

Deploy essential infrastructure 
services,

Build capacity in fire response 
mechanisms, and

Practice inclusive urban 
development and governance

 



KENYA POLICY BRIEFS                                                                             MAY 2020
Towards Realisation of Vision 2030

Volume 1    No. 2

disaster. The first aspect concerns how the
communities react during the fire incidence,
while the second aspect concerns how the
communities cope after the fire occurrence.
There are limited account  and knowledge
on  the  first  aspect,  with  substantial
literature on the second.

Study Results
Response to Fires: The 
Changing Landscape

Initially,  community  members  used  to
watch the fire raze down everything in the
village, instead of engaging in fire fighting,
according to Cyrus Wandeto from Mariguini
village.  There  is  currently  a  sense  of
oneness.  The  residents  have  a  collective
approach  to  respond  to  fire  outbreaks
where  the  first  response is  to  collectively
put out the fire before it spreads. In earlier
years, the residents simply stayed put and
watched properties get destroyed and then
wait  for  landlords  to  rebuild  the  houses.
Wandeto  gave  an  account  of  an  earlier
experience in  1988-89  when a  fire  broke
out in Commercial Village. People salvaged
property  and  stood  by  watching  the  fire
burn everything in the village.

Today,  the  tale  is  different.  Residents
are quick to mobilize and have the situation
under control. The residents suggested that
it would be a good idea to have a container
of  fire  fighting  equipment  in  the  open
spaces within the settlement and that  the
people would collectively take care of the
equipment,  though one person should be
tasked with the responsibility of taking the
day to daycare of the equipment. The cover
figure  shows  the  proposed  improved
system  of  fire  response  in  the  informal
settlements.

Factors to Consider for 
Improved Fire Response

An  analysis  of  community  views
brought out key factors needed to improve
and  capacitate  the  current  community
response  mechanisms  through  training,
facilitation and provision of equipment and
tools.   The  key  factors  showed  that
response mechanisms should be: 

User  Friendly: The  mechanisms
should be simple enough to be employed
and replicated in the informal settlement.
The  less  complex  the  systems  are  the
better as individuals can easily catch on
and train others.

Ease  of  maintenance  and
sustenance: Mechanisms  to  be  used
should  be  simple  in  maintenance  and
sustenance  and  designed  to  minimize
vandalism and cases of neglect. Complex
systems and tools tend to be abandoned
more often than simpler ones. 

Integration into daily use:  The most
effective systems in informal settlements
are those that  are assimilated into daily
use.  This  promotes  the  security
equipment  and  improvement  of  skills.
Tools  that  are  not  incorporated  in  daily
use  end  up  being  forgotten/lost,
vandalized etc.

Cost-effective: The  area  of
implementation  is  a  low-income
neighbourhood.  Therefore,  the
affordability of  the tools is paramount in
cases  where  the  community  has  to
contribute. In instances where tools and
processes are to be funded by external
actors,  the  cost  is  still  put  into
consideration as the tools, both soft and
hard,  should  be  cheap  for  better  wide
implementation. 

Promotion of livelihood: This should
include an aspect of the development of
livelihoods  and economic  empowerment
of individuals. This increases the lifetime
of the tools as the added benefits act as
an incentive to the community members
to  maintain  and  sustain  the  tools  and
equipment..

Policy 
Recommendations

Short-Term
 Deploy  essential  infrastructure

services,  including  installation  of  a
communication  system  that  reaches
the  masses  possibly  through  a
portable public address system and a
bulk  messaging  system;   and
placement  of  firefighting  boxes  with

basic  firefighting  equipment  such  as
whistles,  fire  extinguishers,  demolition
tools  as  are  needed  at  the
neighbourhood level.

 Build  capacity  in  fire  response
mechanisms.  For  example,  a  group  of
resident youth from the settlement from
different villages should be identified and
trained as first responders.

Medium-Term
 Practice  inclusive  urban  development

and  governance.  The  informal
settlements  require  some  level  of
development control by the local leaders
with  all  new  structures  following  set
guidelines.

Acknowledgements
The policy brief is based on the proposals
in  a  study  conducted  and  published  by
Professor Peter, Ngau in the Africa Design
Review Journal.

References
Ngau,  Peter  M.  (2019),  Fire  disaster,

vulnerability  and  response  in  the  informal
settlement,  Nairobi,  Africa  Design  Review
Journal, 1 (1).

Centre  for  Urban  Research  and
Innovations (CURI) (2016). Community Fire
Response  Mechanisms;  Mukuru  Fuata
Nyayo. Nairobi: Centre for Urban Research
and Innovations.

Kenya  Red  Cross  Society  (KCRS)
(2015). Fire Risk in Urban Settlements. Fire
Sensors for Safer Settlements.

UN-OCHA.  (2011).  Kenya  Urban
Disasters:  Fire  Situation  Report  No.  1.
Nairobi.

Authors
Dr Samuel Mwituria Maina 
(smmaina@uonbi.ac.ke)
School of the Arts and Design
Prof. Peter M. Ngau 
(pngau@uonbi.ac.ke)
Department of Urban and Regional 
Planning, 
University of Nairobi, 
P.O. Box 30197-00100, Nairobi, Kenya

©2020 Authors
Published by Office of DVC Research, Innovation and Enterprise,  https://uonresearch.org/journal/kpb                    
University of Nairobi, http://www.uonbi.ac.ke

38


